Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ftpv20
Terrorism and Political Violence
ISSN: 0954-6553 (Print) 1556-1836 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ftpv20
Measuring Political Mobilization: The Distinction
Between Activism and Radicalism
Sophia Moskalenko & Clark McCauley
To cite this article: Sophia Moskalenko & Clark McCauley (2009) Measuring Political Mobilization:
The Distinction Between Activism and Radicalism, Terrorism and Political Violence, 21:2, 239-260,
DOI: 10.1080/09546550902765508
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09546550902765508
Published online: 30 Mar 2009.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 6235
View related articles
Citing articles: 84 View citing articles
Measuring Political Mobilization: The Distinction
Between Activism and Radicalism
SOPHIA MOSKALENKO
Department of Homeland Security, USA
CLARK M C CAULEY
Psychology Department, Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania,
USA
In this paper we review and extend measures of political mobilization: the increasing
extremity of beliefs, feelings, and behaviors in support of inter-group conflict. Build-
ing on previous research, we introduce the Activism and Radicalism Intention Scales
(ARIS). The Activism Intention Scale assesses readiness to participate in legal and
non-violent political action, whereas the Radicalism Intention Scale assesses readi-
ness to participate in illegal or violent political action. In ad-hoc samples of U.S. and
Ukrainian undergraduates, and in an Internet panel survey representative of the U.S.
population, Activism and Radicalism intentions formed two correlated but distin-
guishable dimensions. The popular ‘‘conveyor belt’’ metaphor of radicalization
(implying that activism leads easily to radicalism and that most radicals emerge
from activism) found only mixed support in our results. Discussion suggests
the potential usefulness of the ARIS for learning about how individuals move from
political attitudes and beliefs to political action, including political violence and
terrorism.
Keywords activism, group identification, radicalism, terrorism
Terrorist attacks in Europe and in North America have brought new urgency to the
study of political radicalization. From a social science perspective, the problem is to
understand how psychologically normal individuals, 1 often born and educated in the
country they attack, are moved to risk-taking and violence for a political cause. A
literature burgeoning over decades has focused on the last step of this trajectory:
Sophia Moskalenko received her Ph.D. in Social Psychology from the University of
Pennsylvania in 2004. She is a postdoctoral fellow at the Department of Homeland Security
and a research fellow at the National Consortium for Study of Terrorism and Responses to
Terrorism (NC-START). Clark McCauley is Professor of Psychology and a director of the
Solomon Asch Center for Study of Ethnopolitical Conflict at Bryn Mawr College, and a
co-director of the National Consortium for Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism
(NC-START).
This research was supported by the United States Department of Homeland Security
through the National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism
(START), grant number N00140510629. However, any opinions, findings, conclusions, or
recommendations in this document are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
views of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
Address correspondence to Sophia Moskalenko, Department of Psychology, Bryn Mawr
College 101 N. Merion Ave. Bryn Mawr, PA 19010, USA. E-mail: smoskale@gmail.com
Terrorism and Political Violence, 21:239–260, 2009
Copyright # Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 0954-6553 print=1556-1836 online
DOI: 10.1080/09546550902765508
239
the transition to terrorism. 2,3 Since the terrorist attacks of 9=11, however, increasing
attention has been given to less extreme forms of activism that may precede involve-
ment in political violence.4
A common perspective in seeking the more distal origins of terrorism is that the
trajectory to terrorism is a dimension that begins in grievance and ends in violence.
According to U.S. Department of State Country Reports on Terrorism, ‘‘terrorists
seek to manipulate grievances in order to radicalize others by pulling them further
and further into illegal activities. This is best represented as a ‘conveyor belt’ through
which terrorists seek to convert alienated or aggrieved populations, convert them to
extremist viewpoints, and turn them, by stages, into sympathizers, supporters, and,
ultimately, members of terrorist networks.’’ 5 The mass media 6,7 and the U.S. intelli-
gence community 8 have also described political radicalization of jihadist terrorists as
a ‘‘conveyor belt.’’
This is a powerful metaphor. The implication of a ‘‘conveyor belt’’ to terrorism
is that Muslim activist groups that focus on Muslim grievances, especially Muslim
groups in Western countries that focus on Muslim grievances against Western gov-
ernments, are proximate sources of terrorism. For example, Hizb ut-Tahrir empha-
sizes Muslim suffering at the hands of Western countries and publicly argues for the
same future that Osama Bin Laden seeks: restoration of a global caliphate that
encompasses all Muslims. 9 From a conveyor-belt perspective, Hizb and other radical
Muslim groups are dangerous contributors to violence; they require close surveil-
lance and perhaps should be legally banned.
Another perspective, however, is that non-violent activist groups are competing
for members against violent and terrorist groups that claim to represent the same
cause. Thus Hizb ut-Tahrir, which agrees with the long-term goals of Al-Qaeda
but not its violent means, may be more a competitor than a conveyor-belt for Al-
Qaeda. 10 Generally, in this view, ‘‘violence is not a quantitative degree of conflict
but a qualitative form of conflict, with its own dynamics.’’11 This possibility suggests
the importance of learning more about the relation between legal and illegal political
action.
There is no doubt that some activists become terrorists. In the U.S., the Weather
Underground emerged out of the 1960s anti-war movement, Students for a Demo-
cratic Society.12 The existence of such cases does not, however, give much indication
of how many peaceful activists move to terrorism, or how many terrorists were peace-
ful activists before moving to violence. So far as we are aware, there is little systematic
evidence linking peaceful political action to political violence. Indeed a recent survey
study that included members of U.S. activist groups found that intentions for legal
activism were little related to intentions for illegal and violent political action. 13
In this paper we aim to expand understanding of political mobilization by mea-
suring readiness to engage in legal and non-violent political action (activism) as well
as readiness to engage in illegal and violent political action (radicalism). That is, we
aim to learn more about the link between activism and radicalism that is at issue in
concerns about a conveyor belt to terrorism. It is important to note that radicalism is
not the same as terrorism: terrorists are the subset of radicals who use violence
against civilian targets. The relation between radicalism and terrorism is an impor-
tant issue, but the likelihood of moving from violence against military or government
targets to violence against civilians is not accessible in studies of mostly non-violent
respondents. Thus, we here focus on the more easily tapped distinction between
activism and radicalism, between legal and illegal political action.
240 S. Moskalenko and C. McCauley
We will test the validity of the conveyor belt metaphor by performing
correlational analyses on measures of intended and past activism and radicalism.
If the conveyor belt metaphor is accurate we expect to see a similar pattern of
correlations between activism and radicalism and measures of group identification:
stronger identification should be associated with higher levels of both activism
and radicalism. Additionally, there should be a strong correlation between radical
intention and past activism. On the other hand, a divergent pattern of correlations
between group identification and activism and radicalism, and radical intentions
unrelated to past activism, would indicate that radicalism and activism are motivated
by different relationships with the group and are not simply different stages of the
same psychological progression.
These issues are examined in three surveys that use new measures of political
activism and radicalism based on measures first offered by Corning and Myers; 14
results include initial evidence of discriminant validity for the new measures.
Conceptualizing Political Mobilization
We understand political mobilization as an increasing extremity of beliefs, feelings,
and actions in support of intergroup conflict. 15 This dimension is relevant for under-
standing not just those actively involved in conflict, but as well the much larger num-
ber who sympathize with or support the combatants. Activists of a social movement,
soldiers of a national army, and perpetrators of terrorism—each of these groups can
be seen as the apex of a much larger pyramid of sympathizers and supporters. To
understand the behavior and persistence of the apex requires understanding the
larger pyramid on which the apex depends for moral and material support, including
new recruits. 16
The conveyor-belt metaphor is part of a stage-theory interpretation of the
pyramid model of radicalization. In this interpretation, the levels of the pyramid
are discrete stages with different levels of political commitment: the base of
sympathizers with a cause, a higher level of those who justify the actions of the radi-
cals, still higher levels of action in support of the cause (including activists), and the
radicals as an apex of illegal and violent political actors. Individuals are assumed to
move toward radicalism through ascending stages of radicalization. The transition
from activist to radical is then the transition to the apex, and it is activists—the stage
below radicals—who make the transition.
We prefer an interpretation of the pyramid that is not a stage theory and does
not require that each level of the pyramid is attained by passing through the level
or levels below it. Among the mechanisms of radicalization so far identified are
personal grievance, group grievance, and love. 17 An inert sympathizer can be
moved directly from the base of the pyramid to the apex by experiencing personal
loss or affront, by identification with a new and vivid example of loss or affront to
the cause, or simply by invitation from a loved one who is already radicalized.
Thus we understand that an individual can move to the apex of radicalization from
any level, even from a base of unpoliticized sympathizers. This understanding of
the pyramid model leads us to suspect that there are many activists who never
become radicals, and, more important, that there are many radicals without a his-
tory of activism.
Whether via gradual stages or saltation from the base, political mobilization in
the pyramid model means increasing support for intergroup conflict. Non-state
Activism-Radicalism Intention Scales 241
groups that lose the support of their base must eventually give up or die out. For
terrorist groups, in particular, loss of support often means fast desistence, as
occurred in the case of the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia. 18
Although mobilization of beliefs and feelings is an important part of increasing
support for conflict, mobilization of action is crucial, and in this paper we focus on
readiness for political action. For obvious reasons it is difficult to observe radical
behaviors directly. However, research in social psychology indicates that studying
behavioral intentions can often provide a useful proxy for understanding the
corresponding behaviors (see endnote 22 for limitations of the predictive power of
intentions).19–22
A close relationship between intentions and behaviors has been demonstrated in
a variety of contexts, such as health-maintenance behaviors,23 sexual behaviors, 24
driving, 25 and pro-environmental behaviors. 26, 27 For example, Boldero 28 found that
intentions to recycle newspapers significantly predicted actual paper recycling during
a two-week observation period. Similarly, Black and Babrow29 demonstrated that
whether or not a male student was going to wear a condom at his next sexual
encounter was well predicted by his stated intention to do so days or weeks in
advance. Studying intentions for political action may be similarly helpful in under-
standing and predicting activist and radical behavior.
As the first step toward understanding intention for political action, we reviewed
research in psychology and political science in search of measures that would assess
intentions for action in support of a political cause. Particularly we sought a scale
that focused on political action with a generality that could support translation
for use in multiple countries and cultures.
Measuring Political Mobilization
Deaux, Reid, Martin & Bikman 30 measured readiness for collective action on behalf
of one’s ethnic group by using a scale adapted from Lalonde & Cameron. 31 The
15-item scale includes questions about one’s beliefs (e.g., ‘‘I think that my ethnic
group members can better their social position if they organize and work together’’),
feelings (e.g., ‘‘I feel there should be a stronger representation of my ethnic group in
the political sector’’), and behavior (e.g., ‘‘I help organize events for my ethnic com-
munity’’). Although radicalization of beliefs and feelings is often a factor in radica-
lization of behavior, combining all three in one scale weakens the scale’s usefulness
for understanding the transition from opinion to action. Additionally, none of the
items in this scale addressed violent or illegal behaviors.
A number of scales measuring political activism have focused on a particular
political interest or cause, and cannot easily be extended to other issues. For
instance, a measure of collective action for women’s rights 32 would be inapplicable
for measurement of radicalization for ethnic or religious causes (e.g., ‘‘If a man acts
differently when I’m around because I’m a woman, I assure him that it is not
necessary’’). Similarly, a measure of political radicalism that targets gays and
lesbians 33 is not easily translatable to other groups (e.g., ‘‘It is important for gay
and lesbian people to fight for their rights to marry’’).
In a more general approach, Corning and Myers 34 developed a scale of inten-
tions for political action that is adaptable to different political groups and causes.
The Activism Orientation Scale asks about 35 forms of future political action
(e.g., ‘‘How likely is it that you will engage in this activity in the future: Attend
242 S. Moskalenko and C. McCauley
an informational meeting of a political group?’’). This scale was determined to have a
two-factor structure, with legal behaviors loading on one factor (Legal Activism;
e.g., ‘‘How likely is it that you will engage in this activity in the future: Donate
money to a political candidate?’’), and illegal behaviors loading on the second factor
(Illegal Activism; e.g., ‘‘How likely is it that you will engage in this activity in the
future: Engage in any political activity in which you fear for your personal safety?’’).
A limitation of this scale, however, is that it is rooted in U.S. culture in ways that
make it difficult to use in other countries. For example, ‘‘Keep track of the views of
members of Congress regarding an issue important to you’’ is only relevant in a
Western-style democracy, and ‘‘Display a poster or bumper sticker with a political
message’’ is less relevant in parts of the world where few own cars. Additionally,
the scale is long—35 items—and so is difficult to use in conjunction with other
measures in survey research where number of items is limited. Thus, our review of
the literature led us to develop a new scale measuring willingness to sacrifice for a
group or cause. Our ten original items (see Table 2) range from less costly behaviors
(volunteering time for an organization that fights for political rights of a group) to
more risky or costly behaviors (breaking the law, assaulting members of police
force). Following Corning and Myers, 35 we predicted that the ten items would show
a two-component structure, one component roughly corresponding to Legal
Activism (Activism), and the other to Illegal Activism (Radicalism).
The next section considers some possible correlates of political mobilization.
Mobilization and Group Identification
Group identification is caring about the outcomes of a group,36 and identification
with a group or cause implies positive feelings when the group or cause is advancing
and succeeding, as well as negative feelings if the group or cause is losing or failing.
Group identification has been identified as a significant force in determining a vari-
ety of behaviors, from consumer choices 37,38 to decisions to go to war.39,40
The strength of group identification can vary depending on circumstances of
intergroup relations. For instance, when the group is threatened, as was the case with
Americans in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of 9=11, group identification
increases. 41 Paradoxically, identification with the group may also increase when
the group is doing particularly well. 42
Individual circumstances can also affect group identification. When individual
self-esteem is threatened,43,44 or when an individual is made to think about death, 45
or made to experience uncertainty in the face of an unfamiliar task, 46,47 group
identification is likely to increase. In view of the evidence linking group identification
with threats to self-esteem, we included a self-esteem measure.
According to Social Movement theorists, group identification—the extent of
common identity and unifying structure among the individuals—is related to mobi-
lization of action in support of the group. 48,49 In a classic contribution to Social
Movement Theory, Gamson 50 argued that political mobilization is an extension of
group identification, and is on the same continuum as voting and other lower-cost
manifestations of group affiliation. In this view, the more identified one is with
a group, the more one should be ready to make sacrifices for the group: ‘‘To
reap the rewards of such identification requires commitment. The greater the
sacrifice and effort involved, the greater is then investment of self, and, hence,
Activism-Radicalism Intention Scales 243
the greater the personal satisfaction (or disappointment) with the achievements of
the collective actor.’’ 51
As an individual can be a member of, and identify with, multiple groups at the
same time, we were interested to explore the relation of activism and radicalism
intentions to directions of group identification that would likely be salient for stu-
dent respondents in our first study. To this end, Study 1 included one-item measures
of strength of identification with five groups: country, ethnic group, religious group,
university, and family. 52
Study 1
Methods
Participants
Students in a Social Psychology class (Fall 2005) recruited 140 fellow students
who were U.S. citizens to complete a questionnaire entitled ‘‘Students’ lives in
context’’ for a class research project. Participants were 140 students from Bryn
Mawr College (104, 73%) and Haverford College (32, 23%); four participants
did not identify their school. One hundred twenty-two of the participants (86%)
were women, and 18 (13%) were men. Their ages ranged from 17 to 33, with a
mean of 19.6 (SD ¼ 1.78). One hundred and six participants (75%) were Cauca-
sian, 11 (8%) were East Asian, 7 (5%) were African American and 9 (6%) were
of mixed ethnicity. Forty-one participants (29%) were atheists; 34 (24%) were
Protestant, 29 (20%) were Catholic, 10 (7%) were Jewish, and 25 (17%) were of
other religions. Most participants (84, 60%) reported themselves to be Democrats,
14 (10%) were Republican, 11 (8%) were Independent, and the rest reported other
political affiliations.
Questionnaire and Procedure
The questionnaire was explicitly anonymous and instructed participants ‘‘not to put
down any identifying information.’’ Participants were solicited in cafeterias,
libraries, and at the Campus Center at Bryn Mawr College; they completed the ques-
tionnaire while the student researcher was waiting, without skipping ahead or flip-
ping through the pages. The student researcher discussed the ideas in the study
with each participant on completion of the survey, and the results of the survey were
analyzed and presented in class.
The questionnaire began with ratings of Importance of five different groups:
Country, Family, Ethnic group, Religious group, and College (rated in this order from
1 ¼ not at all important to 7 ¼ extremely important with intermediate values not
labeled). Then participants were asked to think of ‘‘the Group You Feel Closest to,
such as religious group, ethnic group, or any other group that is important to
you’’ and write the name of that group down in the space provided. They were
instructed that the subsequent questions were about the group they just named.
Following was a newly constructed 10-item Activism-Radicalism Intentions Scale
(ARIS), with each item rated on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 1 ¼ disagree
completely to 4 ¼ neutral to 7 ¼ agree completely (intermediate values not labeled).
Then participants completed a one-item Self-Esteem measure.53 Finally, participants
answered demographic questions.
244 S. Moskalenko and C. McCauley
Results
The means and standard deviations of group importance ratings are reported in
Table 1. Group importance ratings were highest for family, followed by college,
country, ethnic group, and religious group.
The correlations among ratings of group importance and the scale of group
identification with country were all positive and ranged from .23 (between impor-
tance of country and importance of university) to .02 (between importance of
college and importance of religion). These correlations (not tabled but available from
the authors) were similar to those reported in Moskalenko, McCauley, Rozin.54
For the Activism-Radicalism Intention Scale (ARIS), participants were asked to
write down the group that was most important to them. They listed a total of 21
groups; the most common choice was ‘‘women’’ (11 participants, 8%). Other groups
included religious (Catholics, 6), ethnic (Taiwanese, 1), athletic (runners, 1), political
(environmentally-conscious, 1) and academic (gifted students, 1). The range of group
types was too wide to allow for a meaningful analysis by group.
Structure of Activism and Radicalism Intention Scale
Exploratory Principal Component Analysis using SPSS produced three components
with eigenvalues greater than 1.0 (4.38, 1.71, and 1.01) which accounted for 44%,
17%, and 10% of the total variance, respectively. Oblimin rotation of two compo-
nents produced interpretable dimensions (50% and 20% of the total variance) that
correlated .36 (see Table 2). The first component showed high loadings for the items
pertaining to legal and non-violent political activism (Activism), and the second
component showed high loadings for the items pertaining to illegal and violent
activism (Radicalism).
We constructed two corresponding scales, the Activism Intention Scale (AIS) and
the Radicalism Intention Scale (RIS) by averaging across the four items loading high-
est on each factor. AIS (M ¼ 5.31, SD ¼ 1.31, alpha .86) correlated .42 with RIS
(M ¼ 2.91, SD ¼ 1.49, alpha .83). Not surprisingly, the mean for AIS was signifi-
cantly higher than the mean for RIS (t(139) ¼ 19.03, p < .01). While 66% of partici-
pants expressed activist intentions (score of 5 or above on AIS with 4 ¼ neutral), only
12% expressed radical intentions (score of 5 or above on RIS). Sixteen participants
Table 1. Mean (SD) of ratings of group importance for
Studies 1 and 2
Importance of Study 1 Study 2
Country 4.76 (1.65) 5.86 (1.19)
Family 6.59 (0.86) 6.80 (0.76)
Ethnicity 4.20 (1.85) 5.59 (1.30)
Religion 3.47 (2.36) 5.09 (1.61)
w=o Atheists 4.37 (1.96) 5.23 (1.40)
College 4.97 (2.36) 5.84 (1.16)
Party N=A 3.19 (2.01)
Note. Ratings from 1 ¼ not at all important to 7 ¼ extremely
important.
Activism-Radicalism Intention Scales 245
scored 5 or above on both AIS and RIS (these 16 individuals represented 17% of
those scoring 5 or above on AIS and 94% of those scoring 5 or above on RIS).
Predictors of Activism and Radicalism Intentions
Table III reports correlations between AIS and RIS and ratings of importance of
five groups.
Rated importance of country correlated positively with AIS (r(140) ¼ .20,
p ¼ .02); higher rating on importance of country was associated with greater willing-
ness to participate in non-violent actions to benefit one’s group), but country impor-
tance was not correlated with RIS (r ¼ .10, ns). Additionally, importance of ethnic
group correlated positively with RIS (r ¼ .25, p < .01), but was not significantly
related to AIS (r ¼ .13, ns). Ratings of importance of family, religion, and university
showed no correlations with either AIS or RIS.
Table 2. Study 1 (Study 3) item loadings for Activism Intentions Scale (AIS) and
Radicalism Intentions Scale (RIS)
AIS RIS
1. I would join=belong to an organization that fights
for my group’s political and legal rights
.84 (.89) .00 (.00)
2. I would donate money to an organization that
fights for my group’s political and legal rights
.86 (88) .00 (.00)
3. I would volunteer my time working (i.e. write
petitions, distribute flyers, recruit people, etc.) for
an organization that fights for my group’s
political and legal rights
.90 (.88) .00 (.00)
4. I would travel for one hour to join in a public
rally, protest, or demonstration in support of my
group
.76 (.81) .15 (.38)
5. I would continue to support an organization that
fights for my group’s political and legal rights
even if the organization sometimes breaks the law
.24 (.44) .67 (.73)
6. I would continue to support an organization that
fights for my group’s political and legal rights
even if the organization sometimes resorts to
violence
.00 (.00) .85 (.82)
7. I would participate in a public protest against
oppression of my group even if I thought the
protest might turn violent
.12 (.43) .78 (.86)
8. I would attack police or security forces if I saw
them beating members of my group
.21 (.00) .83 (.88)
9. I would go to war to protect the rights of my
group
.00 .48
10. I would retaliate against members of a group that
had attacked my group, even if I couldn’t be sure
I was retaliating against the guilty partie
.00 .39
Note. Bold items averaged in AIS and RIS scales.
246 S. Moskalenko and C. McCauley
AIS and RIS were uncorrelated with self-esteem, Age or Family Income. Gender
was related to AIS (r(140) ¼ .20, p ¼ .02), such that women reported more intention
than men to engage in legal and non-violent actions to promote their self-nominated
group.
Study 1 Discussion
Study 1 introduced the Activism and Radicalism Intentions Scales (ARIS), a brief
measure of intentions relating to political behavior. As expected, a two-component
structure was uncovered, with the first component representing Activism (intentions
to participate in legal non-violent acts on behalf of a group important to partici-
pants), and the second component representing Radicalism (intentions to participate
in illegal=violent acts on behalf of the same group). Two corresponding four-item
scales were constructed, Activism Intention Scale (AIS) and Radicalism Intention
Scale (RIS), each with good alpha reliability.
AIS and RIS showed some evidence of discriminant validity in that they corre-
lated differently with measures of importance of country and ethnic group. Thus,
AIS but not RIS was positively correlated with importance of country, whereas
RIS but not AIS was positively correlated with importance of ethnic group. These
results were unpredicted but make some sense. U.S. citizens more strongly identified
with country are more ready for political action that is normative for citizens: legal
and non-violent protest activities. But citizens more strongly identified with an eth-
nic group can imagine the interests of this group running counter to the authority of
the state and so may be more ready to undertake illegal and violent action in defense
of ethnic comrades.
We observed slightly higher radicalism among women than among men in our
student sample. However, given the small proportion of male participants (13%)
and the possibly atypical political characteristics of female participants from an
all-women’s college, the gender difference in Study 1 cannot be taken seriously with-
out replication.
Most generally, the results of Study 1 support the distinction between Activism
and Radicalism as forms of political mobilization. Although significantly correlated,
AIS and RIS are related to different directions of group identification (country vs.
ethnicity).
Study 2
Study 2 had two aims. First, we wanted to try the AIS and RIS with participants
outside the U.S. in order to test whether the new scales have the kind of cross-
cultural applicability that was one of our original goals. We hoped to replicate the
two-factor scale structure observed in Study 1, as well as the differential correlations
between AIS and RIS and measures of group identification. Second, we wanted
respondents to complete the ARIS scales with more than one target group in order
to test whether Activism and Radicalism are general dispositions or specific to
particular political groups or causes.
With these aims in mind, we designed a survey to be used with university
students in Ukraine, where lifestyle and culture are sufficiently different from the
U.S. or Western Europe to provide a meaningful test of scale generalizability. In
addition, the legacy of the 2004 Ukrainian ‘‘Orange Revolution,’’ accomplished to
Activism-Radicalism Intention Scales 247
a large degree by student activists, provides a student population with a recent
history of political mobilization. The survey asked about Activism and Radicalism
in relation to three groups: Country, Ethnic Group, and Political Party. Political
party was included as a target because the ‘‘Orange Revolution’’ was a result of a
presidential election widely perceived as unfair, and the subsequent conflict between
a coalition of opposition political parties and the government made political party
affiliation especially salient for Ukrainian students. We also included ratings of
importance for the same five groups (country, ethnic group, family, religious group,
and university) as in Study 1.
Methods
Participants
Participants were 146 students at Kiev Economic University and Kiev Polytechnic
University. One hundred and seven (72%) of participants were women, and 39
(26%) were men. Their age ranged from 16 to 28, with a mean of 17.5 (SD ¼ 1.2).
All participants were Ukrainian citizens, and 143 (98%) were also ethnic Ukrainians
(2 people reported their ethnicity as Russian, and 1 as Chinese). One hundred twelve
of our participants (80%) said they were Orthodox Christian; 19 (14%) were Atheists;
the remaining 9 (6%) reported mixed religious affiliations (e.g., Buddist, Muslim,
Pagan).
Procedure
Students were approached in hallways and cafeterias of Kiev Economic University
and Kiev Polytechnic University in January 2005 and asked to complete an anon-
ymous questionnaire about ‘‘the complexity of students’ social and public lives’’ in
return for 15 Hryvnas (about three US Dollars). They were instructed to answer
the questions in one sitting, in the order in which they were presented, without skip-
ping ahead or taking a long break. Upon returning the questionnaire, participants
were paid, and student researchers explained the goals of the study.
Questionnaire
The questionnaire was in Ukrainian (translated and back-translated from English by
two independent interpreters who agreed on the final translation). Participants were
first asked to write down their country of citizenship, ethnicity, and political party
affiliation. Then they were asked to rate on a 7-point Likert scale (as in Study 1)
the importance of six groups: Country, Political Party, Family, Religion, Ethnicity,
and University (in this order).
Participants then completed the AIS and RIS (eight items total). Each item was
asked three times: first, targeting country (e.g., ‘‘I would travel for one hour to join
in a public rally, protest, or demonstration in support of my country’’), then target-
ing ethnic group (e.g., ‘‘I would travel for one hour . . . in support of my ethnic
group’’), and finally targeting political party (e.g., ‘‘I would travel for one hour . . . in
in support of my political party’’). Each three-questions block was separated from
the next block by space so as to alert participants to the shift to a new question.
Owing to the highly homogenous ethnic make-up of our participants (98%
percent reported themselves as ethnic Ukrainians), results for ARIS targeting
country and for ARIS targeting ethnic group were very similar. AIS for country
and for ethnic group were highly correlated (r(144) ¼ .82, p < .01), as were RIS for
248 S. Moskalenko and C. McCauley
country and ethnic group (r(144) ¼ .84, p < .01). What’s more, AIS and RIS
targeting country showed the same pattern of results with other measures as AIS
and RIS targeting ethnic group. Given the redundancy of ethnicity and country
for Ukrainian participants, we report here only the results for country. Finally,
participants’ responded to the single-item Self-Esteem measure 55 and demographic
questions.
Results
Most participants (109; 76%) did not list a party with which they aligned themselves,
although 59 of the 109 nevertheless proceeded to rate the importance of their
political party as higher than 1 ¼ not at all important or not applicable. Indeed 22
of the 109 rated importance of their political party above 4 on the 7-point scale.
Our interpretation of this paradox is that, in the light of the recent political events,
including the ‘‘Orange Revolution,’’ some students felt uneasy or unsafe in reporting
their political party affiliation. Those 37 participants who listed a party affiliation
belonged to 15 different political parties, with the most often listed party (Block Ulia
Timoshenko) listed by only 8 students.
Importance Ratings
The means and standard deviations of importance ratings of the six groups are
reported in Table 1. Highest rated was importance of family, approaching the ceiling
on the 7-point scale. Next highest rated was importance of country, followed by
importance of university, ethnicity, and religion, and finally importance of political
party. Correlations among importance ratings (not tabled, available from authors)
were positive with one exception: importance of party correlated .16, p ¼ .06, with
importance of family. Remaining correlations ranged from .04 between importance
of religion and importance of country to .43 between importance of family and
importance of the university.
AIS and RIS
Exploratory Principal Component Analysis with Oblimin Rotation was conducted
for the eight ARIS items for both country and political party. Results were the same
for both target groups and the same as in Study 1. Non-violent and legal behaviors
loaded on the first component and violent and illegal behaviors loaded on the second
(loadings were similar to those reported in Table 2 of Study 1). For country, the two
components (eigenvalues 2.84 and 1.64) accounted for 35% and 20% of the total
variance (r ¼ .23). For political party, the two components (eigenvalues 4.26 and
1.29) accounted for 47% and 14% of the variance (r ¼ .46). Thus four-item means
of AIS and RIS were calculated for each participant for the two targets: country
and political party.
With country as the target group, AIS (M ¼ 4.09, SD ¼ 1.43, alpha .72) corre-
lated .37 (p < .01) with RIS (M ¼ 2.87, SD ¼ 1.32, alpha.70). With political party
as the target group, AIS (M ¼ 2.94, SD ¼ 1.50, alpha .64) correlated .57 (p < .01)
with RIS (M ¼ 2.49, SD ¼ 1.33, alpha .60).
The correlations among AIS and RIS scales targeting different groups were all
positive and significant (N of correlations 141 – 146, p < .05): AIS country with AIS
Activism-Radicalism Intention Scales 249
party r ¼ .47 and with RIS party r ¼ .28; RIS country with AIS party r ¼ .47 and with
RIS party r ¼ .81.
The notable result here is the .81 correlation between RIS for country and RIS
for party. This correlation exceeds the level of the alpha reliabilities of these scales
(.70 and .60) and indicates that students ready for illegal and violent political action
for their country are also ready for such action for their political party. The corre-
sponding correlation of .47, between AIS for country and AIS for party, is signifi-
cantly smaller (Fisher’s Z ¼ 5.25, p < .01). Thus readiness for activism is
discriminating, whereas readiness for radicalism is more general. Whether the gener-
ality of activism is better understood in terms of personality or in terms of political
development will be considered in the discussion that follows.
As in Study 1, AIS averaged higher than RIS: for country, t(145) ¼ 9.62,
p < .01; for political party, t(145) ¼ 3.68, p < .01. Thus, while 46 participants
(31%) expressed activist intentions for country (score of 5 or above on AIS), only
12 (8%) expressed radical intentions for country (score of 5 or above on RIS).
Similarly, 15 (10%) participants expressed activist intentions for party, but only
8 (5%) expressed radical intentions for party. Five participants scored 5 or above
on both country AIS and country RIS (representing 11% of 46 with activist inten-
tions and 42% of 12 with radical intentions). Five participants scored 5 or above
on both party AIS and party RIS (representing 33% of 15 with activist intentions
and 63% of 8 with radical intentions).
Correlates of AIS and RIS
Table 3 reports correlations between AIS and RIS and measures of group impor-
tance for six groups. Country AIS was positively correlated with importance of:
country, party, religion, and ethnicity. As noted earlier, country, party, religion,
and ethnicity are closely linked for Ukrainian students. Party AIS was positively cor-
related with importance of country and party. Country RIS and party RIS, as might
be expected from their high correlation, showed the same pattern: both were
associated only with importance of party. It is worth noting that the significant
correlations in Table 3 all involved identification with politically salient groups;
Table 3. Study 1 and Study 2 correlations between Activism and Radicalism
Intention Scales and rated importance of groups
Study 1 Study 2
Importance
of
AIS chosen
group1
RIS chosen
group1
AIS
Ukraine
RIS
Ukraine
AIS
party
RIS
party
Country .20 .10 .28 .06 .22 .01
Family .12 .07 .09 .03 .11 .07
Ethnicity .13 .25 .29 .18 .16 .15
Religion .09 .11 .22 .06 .03 .02
College .08 .15 .05 .11 .05 .11
Party NA NA .21 .25 .43 .32
Note. N of correlations: 141–146. p < .05; p < .01. 1 See text.
250 S. Moskalenko and C. McCauley
importance of family and importance of university did not correlate with any AIS or
RIS scale in either Study 1 or Study 2.
There was a consistent small positive correlation between self-esteem and RIS
for both country (r(142) ¼ .17, p ¼ .04) and political party (r(142) ¼ .19, p ¼ .02).
Self-esteem was not correlated with AIS targeting country (r(142) ¼ .02, ns), but
was positively correlated with AIS for party (r(142) ¼ .20, p ¼ .02).
Age was related to AIS for political party, so that younger participants reported
more intention toward party activism (r(144) ¼ .22, p ¼ .01). Neither age nor
Gender related to any other scale.
Study 2 Discussion
Our first aim in Study 2 was to test the usefulness of the AIS and RIS with a non-
U.S. population. This aim was accomplished insofar as Ukrainian participants had
no difficulty answering the eight items that make up the AIS and RIS; there were few
missing values in our data. More specifically, the two-factor structure of ARIS found
in Study 1 with U.S. students was replicated in Study 2 with Ukrainian students for
both target groups (country and political party). Study 2 also supported Study 1 in
showing that AIS and RIS correlated differently with identification with country. As
with the U.S. students, Ukrainian students who identify more with country are
intending more legal and non-violent political action but not more illegal and violent
action.
Our second aim was to have the same respondents complete AIS and RIS for
different target groups to determine whether activism and radicalism are general per-
sonality orientations or specific to certain groups or political causes. We found,
notably, that Ukrainian students distinguished activism for country and activism
for party (correlation .47), but did not distinguish radicalism for country and party
(correlation .81). One possible interpretation of this pattern is that there is some gen-
eral personality disposition that makes an individual more or less ready for illegal
and violent political action—no matter the group or cause. Eric Hoffer’s 56 ‘‘true
believer’’ might represent one instantiation of such a disposition.
A more nuanced interpretation, consistent with social psychology’s emphasis on
the power of the situation, 57 is that radicals are not born but made. In particular,
individuals may be radicalized by state response to their own or others’ actions
for their cause. 58 In this interpretation, there may be a threshold for illegal and vio-
lent political action, which, once crossed, leaves an individual ready for radical
action for any cause with which the individual identifies. Distinguishing these possi-
bilities will require further research.
One interesting finding in Ukraine was with respect to importance of political
party. This was the only identification measure that predicted both Activism and
Radicalism for both party and country. A possible explanation is that political party
membership is already a measure of activism because, unlike the ascribed values of
citizenship, ethnicity, and, in many cases, religion, political party membership is
freely chosen. Political party membership may also already be a measure of radical-
ism, as students giving high importance to political party may have recently partici-
pated in the ‘‘Orange Revolution.’’ Their experience of illegal political behavior in
the streets of Kiev, however small or accidental, could lead them to see themselves
as activists and radicals for both country and party.
Activism-Radicalism Intention Scales 251
Study 3
In Study 3 our goal was to replicate the two-component structure of the ARIS that
we observed in student samples in Studies 1 and 2 in a sample representative of U.S.
adults. Additionally, we wanted to explore the relationship between the ARIS scales
of intentions for future activism and radicalism, and history of past activist or radi-
cal behavior. In many samples, including samples from some foreign countries, ask-
ing about personal history of activism or radicalism is counter-productive, as it may
leave people worried about researchers’ motivation, and unlikely to answer truth-
fully. However, with American respondents who are not usually suspicious of social
scientists we thought it might be possible to include questions about past activism
and radicalism and thereby further test validity of ARIS.
Past behavior is generally predictive of future behavior of the same kind, 59 In
particular, a history of consistent patterns of behavior may contribute to an
action-specific self-concept, or ‘‘self-perception.’’ 60 The more an act has been inte-
grated into an individual’s self-perception, the more likely the individual is to repeat
this and related acts. 61 Consistency pressures may also contribute to the relation
between past and future behavior, as when someone suffering more to join a group
then comes to like the group better.62
The relation between past and future behavior need not be linear, however.
Ferguson and Bibby, 63 for instance, found that the relationship between past
blood donations and likelihood of future donations was an inverted parabola,
such that the most frequent donors of the past were less likely to donate
in the future than those with medium-frequency of past donations. Another
qualification is that past behavior may be a better predictor for habitual and
well-practiced acts, such as brushing teeth after each meal, than for rare and
more deliberate ones, such as the acts of activism or radicalism that are the focus
of this paper. 64
Thus, in Study 3 we included questions addressing past activist and radical beha-
viors in order to explore how past behavior relates to future intentions for activism
and radicalism. In light of the empirical literature indicating complex relations
between past behaviors and future intentions in other social domains, we expected
moderate positive correlations between past activism and radicalism and future
intentions for activist and radical intentions.
Methods
Participants
Participants were recruited by a professional polling company, Knowledge
Networks. Using Random Digit Dialing (RDD), KN recruited individuals to take
part in internet-based surveys from Time-sharing Experiments for Social Sciences
(TESS; http:==www.experimentcentral.org). In return those without a computer
and=or without an internet connection received WebTV and free internet access;
those with an active internet connection received cash-redeemable points.
Of the 596 solicited individuals, 72% agreed to participate in the internet survey
in December 2006. The resulting 429 participants resided all across the United
States, represented levels of education from less than high school (3%) to doctoral
degree (2%), and came from a variety of ethnic categories (White 70%, Black
Non-Hispanic 11%, Hispanic 12%, Other non-Hispanic 5%, and Mixed 2%). There
252 S. Moskalenko and C. McCauley
were 223 (52%) males and 206 (48%) females, ages ranging from 18 to 92 with a mean
of 46 (SD ¼ 17).
Questionnaire
The AIS and RIS questions were preceded by a section that asserted: ‘‘people
care about many different kinds of groups, including the following: Religious (e.g.
Catholics, Muslims); Single-Issue (e.g. environmental, human rights, abortion);
Economic (e.g. union, farmers, unemployed); Political (e.g. Democrats, Republicans,
Libertarian); Ethnic=Racial (e.g. African–Americans, Native Americans, Irish); and
Gender=Lifestyle (e.g. Gay=Lesbian, women, Goths).’’ Respondents were then asked
to write down the name of the particular group most important to them and
instructed that ‘‘my group’’ in the next eight questions (AIS and RIS) referred to
the group they just wrote down. The AIS and RIS questions were on a 4-point Likert
scale, with 1 ¼ very unlikely, 2 ¼ unlikely, 3 ¼ likely, and 4 ¼ very likely.
Following AIS and RIS items were four items about history of Past Activist
behavior and two items about history of Past Radical behaviors. These questions
were based on the highest-loading items from Corning and Myers 65 Legal Activism
and Illegal Activism Dimensions, adapted here to ask about past history rather than
future intention (i.e., attended a talk on a particular group’s social or political con-
cerns?). Participants were asked ‘‘At any time in the past have you ever engaged
in the activity described below (for ANY group or cause, not just the group you
identified earlier),’’ with no coded 1 and yes coded 2. The last section of the question-
naire asked about demographic information.
Results
In response to the question about which group they care most about, 113 partici-
pants (26%) chose a religious group, 109 (25%) chose a single-issue group (e.g., envir-
onmental, human rights, abortion), 61 (14%) chose an economic group (e.g., union,
farmers, unemployed), 48 (11%) did not have a group affiliation, 32 (8%) gave an
inappropriate answer (e.g., ‘‘Medicare Drug Program’’ or ‘‘all of the above’’ or
‘‘not sure’’), 23 (5%) chose a political group (e.g., Democrats, Republicans,
Libertarians), 22 (5%) listed an ethnic=racial group, and 21 (5%) listed a
gender=lifestyle group (e.g., gay=lesbian, women, Goths). Because Activism and
Radicalism measures were targeted to the group each participant chose as most
cared about, participants who either did not have a group preference (N ¼ 48) or
listed something that was not a group (N ¼ 32) were dropped from the analyses
(remaining N ¼ 349).
Activism-Radicalism Scales
A Principal Component Analysis with Oblimin rotation on the eight items in the
Activism-Radicalism Intention Scale uncovered two components with eigenvalues
greater than 1.0 (4.00 and 1.84). The first component included the four items pertain-
ing to activist intentions, and the second component included the four items pertain-
ing to radical intentions (see Table 1). The two components correlated r ¼ .33
(p < .01). The four-item Activism Intention Scale (AIS) had good reliability
(alpha ¼ .89), as did the four-item Radicalism Intention Scale (alpha ¼ .84). Further
analyses were conducted with averages of the four items within each scale (AIS
Activism-Radicalism Intention Scales 253
M ¼ 2.46, SD ¼ .80; RIS M ¼ 1.70, SD ¼ .68). As in Studies 1 and 2, AIS averaged
higher than RIS, t(348) ¼ 21.77, p < .01.
The correlation of AIS and RIS was .39. Thirty participants (7%) scored 3
(‘‘Likely’’) or above on the RIS scale, and 137 (31%) scored 3 or above on the
AIS. Twenty-two participants scored 3 or above on both AIS and RIS (representing
16% of 137 with activist intentions and 73% of 30 with radical intentions).
A Principal Component Analysis with Oblimin rotation was also conducted on
the six questions about past activist and radical actions. Two components emerged
with eigenvalues greater than 1.0 (2.77,1.25) and these components correlated
r ¼ .33. The first component included the four items pertaining to past activist activ-
ity (Legal Activism); the second component included the two items pertaining to past
radical activity (Illegal Activism), and one item from the first component (organized
a political event). This item was dropped and PCA repeated, resulting in two compo-
nents (eigenvalues 2.41 and 1.22), where the first component included only the three
items pertaining to past activism, and the second component included only the two
items pertaining to past radical activity. The two components correlated at r ¼ .28.
Scales were computed by averaging across items within each component (Past Acti-
vism M ¼ 1.33, SD ¼ .38, alpha ¼ .78; Past Radicalism M ¼ 1.04, SD ¼ .17,
alpha ¼ .67).
Table 4 presents correlations among Past Activism, Past Radicalism, Activism
Intention Scale (AIS), and Radical Intention Scale (RIS). Notice that, although Acti-
vist Intention is best predicted by Past Activism, the best predictor for Radical Inten-
tion is not Past Radicalism, but rather Activism Intention.
Almost half of all participants (209 or 49%) reported some history of activist
behavior by saying ‘‘yes’’ to at least one of the four past activism items, whereas only
26 (6%) reported some history of radical behavior by saying ‘‘yes’’ to at least one of
the two past radicalism items. Twenty-six participants reported some history of both
activist and radical behavior (these participants represented 12% of the 209 who
reported past activist behavior and 100% of those who reported past radical beha-
vior). These responses indicate that, as we hoped, our participants were trustful of
the anonymity of the survey and the integrity of the researchers, revealing informa-
tion about past activism and radicalism that would be more difficult to solicit outside
the U.S.
Demographics
Gender, Age, Race and household Income were not significantly related to either past
or future, activism or radicalism. Education level was positively correlated with AIS
(r(347) ¼ .18, p < .01), and there was a trend for a similar correlation with Past
Table 4. Study 3 correlations among Past Activism and Past Radicalism Scales and
Activism and Radicalism Intention Scales (AIS and RIS)
Past Radicalism AIS RIS
Past Activism .30 .50 .23
Past Radicalism – .18 .22
AIS – .39
Note. p < .01 N of correlations 429.
254 S. Moskalenko and C. McCauley
Activism (r(349) ¼ .09, p ¼ .09); those with higher education reported higher activist
intentions and slightly more past activism. But education was not correlated with
Past Radicalism (r(349) ¼ .07, ns) or with RIS (r(349) ¼ .07, ns).
Study 3 Discussion
In Study 3 our respondents were representative of the U.S. adult population on a
variety of demographic dimensions. Results showed the same two-component struc-
ture of ARIS seen in Studies 1 and 2 with student participants, with Activism and
Radicalism Intentions loading on two distinct dimensions. A similar two-component
structure was observed in the questions about past behaviors, with legal and illegal
behaviors loading on different components.
As expected, past activism predicted intended activism (r ¼ .50) and past radic-
alism predicted intended radicalism (r ¼ .22). These correlations are consistent with
research that links past behaviors with behavioral intentions in a number of social
domains. 66,67 In addition, past activism was related to past radicalism (r ¼ .30)
and activist intentions were related to radical intentions (r ¼ .39). These correlations
are consistent with the ‘‘conveyor belt’’ idea that links activism with radicalism, and
so is the finding that 100% of panel respondents who report past radicalism also
report past activism. Less consistent with the conveyor belt idea is the finding that
only 12% of panel respondents who report past activism also report past radicalism.
General Discussion
This report introduces the Activism and Radicalism Intention Scales (ARIS) Com-
pared with existing scales, 68–71 ARIS is shorter and more easily applied to a broad
variety of political identity groups in and outside of the U.S. For both U.S. and
Ukrainian respondents, ARIS produced a two-component structure, with four items
pertaining to non-violent and legal behaviors comprising the Activism Intention
Scale (AIS), and four items pertaining to illegal and violent behaviors comprising
the Radicalism Intention Scale (RIS).
The two subscales showed adequate alpha reliability and initial evidence of dis-
criminant validity: for both U.S. and Ukrainian students, identification with country
was positively related to Activism, but not to Radicalism. This result suggests that
activist intentions may be an expression of high identification with country along
with motivation to improve it. On the other hand, radical intentions may express loss
of identification with country or loss of identification with the government currently
leading the country.
As described in the introduction, there are two views of the relation between
activism and radicalism. In one view, there is a single dimension of political action
that runs from passivity to activism to radicalism. In this view, represented in the
‘‘conveyor belt’’ metaphor, individuals who are not succeeding with legal and non-
violent political action will, if they care enough about their cause, escalate to illegal
and violent political action. Thus the difference between activism and radicalism is
only a difference in intensity of commitment. 72
In the second view, radicalism is more than an extreme form of activism. Rather
radicalism is a different appraisal of the political situation, an appraisal that justifies
or even requires political violence as the only possible path to political change. In the
second view, activism and radicalism can be competing responses to a perceived need
Activism-Radicalism Intention Scales 255
for political change. Radicals may or may not want change more than activists, but
radicals disagree with activists about how best to bring the desired change.
Our results in general support the second view and infirm the ‘‘conveyor belt’’
perspective. If radicalism differs from activism only in being a more extreme form
of political commitment, then our eight items should have formed a single
dimension. Instead results of principle component analyses in three studies show
activism and radicalism to be distinguishable dimensions. The same studies show
that AIS and RIS scales formed to represent these two dimensions are empirically
distinguishable, with alphas ranging from .60 to .89 that are consistently higher than
scale correlations ranging from .37 to .57.
Perhaps most revealing are the percentages of those with activist intentions who
also have radical intentions, and the percentages of those with radical intentions who
also have activist intentions.
In our three studies, consistently only a small minority of those with activist
intentions have also radical intentions: 17% for U.S. students thinking about group
they care most about, 11% for Ukrainian students thinking about country, 33% for
Ukrainian students thinking about party; 16% for TESS-panel U.S. adults thinking
about group they care most about. Thus one implication of the conveyor-belt meta-
phor appears to be seriously misleading. Only a fraction of those with activist inten-
tions have radical intentions, suggesting that the transition from activism to
radicalism is far from the ineluctable trajectory of a conveyor belt.
The evidence in relation to the other implication of the conveyor-belt meta-
phor is mixed. Those with radical intentions are indeed more likely to have also
activist intentions: 94% for U.S. students, 42% for Ukrainian students thinking
about country, 63% for Ukrainian students thinking about party, and 73% of
U.S. adults in the TESS sample. Most extreme are the results for the TESS panel
in relation to past behavior; 100% of respondents reporting past radical behavior
also report past activist behavior. At the other extreme, however, only 42% of
Ukrainian students with radical intentions for their country also have activist
intentions for their country.
For Ukrainian patriots, there are evidently paths to radical intentions that do
not include activist intentions. In contrast, U.S. respondents scoring high on Radic-
alism also score high on Activism, as might be expected if radicalism is an extreme
form of activism. Further research will be required to test this idea, but we tenta-
tively suggest that the degree to which radicals come out of legal and nonviolent acti-
vism may differ importantly in different times and places. In particular, it is possible
that in repressive regimes where activism is persecuted with the same fervor as radic-
alism, the conveyor belt metaphor is an appropriate description of the common tra-
jectory to radicalism and terrorism. This hypothesis cannot be verified with our
samples from one democratic and one fledgling-democratic country.
Thus the Ukrainian results suggest a mild qualification of the conveyor belt
metaphor. Popular as well as academic discourse73–75 frequently assumes that the
path to political radicalism lies through political activism. In this ‘‘conveyor belt’’
model, all or most terrorists have graduated to radical violence from previous experi-
ence of non-violent activism. But the results for Ukrainian students suggest that indi-
viduals may come to radicalism without engaging in activism first.
The Ukrainian results are consistent at least with what is publicly known about
the individuals implicated in the 7=7 terrorist attacks on the London underground.
These individuals appear to have come to radicalization with at most a history of
256 S. Moskalenko and C. McCauley
brief and inconsequential associations with Muslim activist groups. 76 This pattern
suggests that what contact the bombers had with activist organizations, such as
Hizb-Ut-Tahrir, led them to realize that the activist agenda was incongruent with
their own more radical motivations.
A more important qualification of the conveyor belt model has to do with its
implication that the way from activism to radicalism is easy or even irresistible.
Whoever gets onto the conveyor belt with activism is on the way to radicalism.
About this implication, our data are completely consistent: as already noted, only
a minority with activist intentions have radical intentions. TESS results for past
behavior tell the same story: only a minority reporting past activism also report past
radicalism (12%).
To the extent that the way from activism to radicalism is not easy and auto-
matic, the conveyor belt must be an unhelpful metaphor. If only a small minority
graduate from peaceful activism to violent radicalism, then suppressing groups with
radical ideas can be counterproductive. 77,78 The transition from activism to radical-
ism is often a response to perceived injustice inflicted by state security forces. 79 Ban-
ning a group that advocates radical ideas but has not engaged in illegal political
action may be seen as injustice thereby increasing group identification, and moving
more individuals from activism to radicalism.
Conclusion
The perpetrators of political violence, including terrorist violence, are the apex of a
pyramid of sympathizers and supporters. The beliefs, feelings, and even the intentions
of the pyramid can be tracked with public opinion polls. For example, a poll of U.K.
Muslims 80 after the July 7, 2005, suicide bombings in the London Underground,
asked, ‘‘Do you think any further attacks by British suicide bombers in the UK are
justified or unjustified?’’ Five percent of respondents said ‘‘justified,’’ that is, about
50,000 of the million adult U.K. Muslims thought the bombings were justified in
defense of Islam. But thus far only a few hundreds of U.K. Muslims have been
arrested for suspected terrorist activities. It is clear in this example that the great
majority of those who justify political violence will never engage in political violence.
Thus we have undertaken direct assessment of intentions for political action,
both non-violent legal action (Activism) and illegal and violent action (Radicalism).
If deployed in repeated polls focusing on the same group or cause, ARIS may be able
to track changes in activist and radical intent in the broad base of sympathizers and
supporters where radicals seek forum, funding, and recruits. Change in readiness for
action may then be useful as an index of success and failure in the war of ideas that
aims to cut mass support for perpetrators of political violence.
Notes
1. John Horgan, The Psychology of Terrorism (London: Routledge, 2005).
2. Clark McCauley and Mary Segal, ‘‘Social Psychology of Terrorist Groups,’’ in Clyde
Hendrick, ed., Review of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 9 (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage,
1987), 231–256.
3. Marc Sageman, Understanding Terror Networks (Philadelphia, PA: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 2004).
4. Annette Linden and Bert Klandermans, ‘‘Stigmatization and repression of extreme-
right activism in the Netherlands,’’ Mobilization: An International Journal 11 (2006): 213–228.
Activism-Radicalism Intention Scales 257
5. U.S. Department of State Country Reports on Terrorism. Chapter 1: Strategic
Assessment (2006). Accessed August 8, 2008 at http://www.globalsecurity.org/security/
library/report/2007/c-rprt-terrorism_2006-01.htm
6. Michael Elliot, ‘‘They Had a Plan,’’ Time Magazine, 12 August, 2002.
7. Zeyno Baran, Hizb ut-Tahrir: Islam’s Political Insurgency (Washington, D.C.: The
Nixon Center, DOI, December 2004).
8. National Intelligence Council, National Intelligence Estimate: The Terrorist Threat to
the US Homeland (Washington, DC: Office of the Director of National Intelligence, 2007): 7.
9. Shiv Malik, ‘‘Hizb ut Tahrir and the conveyor belt of extremism—MIM archives
Hizb ut Tahrir,’’ Militant Islam Monitor (London, England: New Statesman, Ltd, 2005).
10. Manos Karagiannis and Clark McCauley, ‘‘Hizb ut-Tahrir al-Islami: Evaluating the
Threat Posed by a Radical Islamic Group that Remains Nonviolent,’’ Terrorism and Political
Violence 18, no. 2 (2006): 315–334.
11. Rogers Brubaker and David Laitin, ‘‘Ethnic and Nationalist Violence,’’ Annual
Review of Sociology 24 (1998): 426.
12. Ehud Sprinzak, ‘‘The process of delegitimation: Toward a linkage theory of political
terrorism,’’ in Clark McCauley, ed., Terrorism and public policy (London: Frank Cass, 1991),
50–68.
13. Alexandra F. Corning and Daniel J. Myers, ‘‘Individual orientation toward engage-
ment in social action,’’ Political Psychology 23 (2002): 703–729.
14. Ibid.
15. Clark McCauley and Sophia Moskalenko, ‘‘Mechanisms of Political Radicalization:
Pathways Toward Terrorism,’’ Terrorism and Political Violence 20 (2008): 415–433.
16. Clark McCauley, ‘‘Terrorism Research and Public Policy: An Overview,’’Journal of
Terrorism and Political Violence 3 (1991): 126–144.
17. McCauley and Moskalenko (see note 15 above).
18. Anat Kurz and Ariel Merari, Asala: Irrational terror or political tool (Jerusalem:
Jerusalem Post=Westview Press, 1985).
19. Martin Fishbein and Icek Ajzen, Belief, attitude, intention, and behavior: An introduc-
tion to theory and research (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1975).
20. Icak Ajzen and Martin Fishbein, Understanding attitudes and predicting social beha-
vior (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1980).
21. Icek Ajzen, ‘‘From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior,’’ in J. Kuhl &
J. Beckmann, eds., Action control: From cognition to behavior (New York: Springer-Verlag,
1985), 11–39.
22. Paschal Sheeran, Sheina Orbell and David Trafimow, ‘‘Does the Temporal Stability
of Behavioral Intentions Moderate Intention-Behavior and Past Behavior-Future Behavior
Relations?’’ Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 25 (1999): 724–732.
23. David R. Black and Austin S. Babrow, ‘‘Identification of campaign recruitment stra-
tegies for a stepped smoking cessation intervention for a college campus,’’ Health Education
Quarterly 18 (1991): 235–247.
24. Jennifer Boldero, S. Moore and D. Rosenthal, ‘‘Intention, context, and safe sex:
Australian adolescents’ responses to aids,’’ Journal of Applied Social Psychology 22 (1992):
1374–1396.
25. Deanne Parker, ‘‘Intention to commit driving violations: An application of the theory
of planned behavior,’’ Journal of Applied Psychology 77 (1992): 94–101.
26. Shu Fai Cheung, Darius K-S. Chan, and Zoe S.-Y. Wong, ‘‘Re-examining the theory
of planned behavior in understanding wastepaper recycling,’’ Environment and Behavior 31
(1999): 587–612.
27. Jennifer Boldero, ‘‘The prediction of household recycling of newspapers: The role of
attitudes, intentions, and situational factors,’’ Journal of Applied Social Psychology 25 (1995):
440–462.
28. Ibid.
29. Black and Babrow (see note 23 above).
30. Kay Deaux, Ann Reid, Daniella Martin, and Nida Bikmen, ‘‘Ideologies of diversity
and inequality: predicting collective action in groups varying in ethnicity and immigrant
status,’’ Political Psychology 27 (2006): 123–146.
258 S. Moskalenko and C. McCauley
31. Richard N. Lalonde and James E. Cameron, ‘‘An intergroup perspective on immi-
grant acculturation with a focus on collective strategies,’’ International Journal of Psychology
28 (1993): 57–74.
32. Mindy D. Foster and Kimberly Matheson, ‘‘Double relative deprivation: Combining
the personal and political,’’ Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 21 (1995): 1167–1177.
33. Joe N. Rollins and Harry N. Hirsch, ‘‘Sexual Identities and Political Engagements: A
Queer Survey,’’ Social Politics: International Studies in Gender, State and Society 10 (2003):
290–313.
34. Corning and Myers (see note 13 above).
35. Ibid.
36. Clark McCauley, ‘‘The psychology of group identification and the power of ethnic
nationalism,’’ in Daniel Chirot and Martin Seligman, eds., Ethnopolitical warfare: causes,
consequences, and possible solutions (Washington, DC: APA Books, 2001), 343–362.
37. Robert J. Fisher and Kirk Wakefield, ‘‘Factors leading to group identification: A
field study of winners and losers,’’ Psychology and Marketing 15 (1998): 23–40.
38. Eithel M. Simpson, Thelma Snuggs, Tim Christiansen, and Kelli E. Simples, ‘‘Race,
homophily, and purchase intentions and the Black consumer,’’ Psychology and Marketing 17
(2000): 877–889.
39. Jameth Griffith, ‘‘Multilevel analysis of cohesion’s relation to stress, well-being, iden-
tification, disintegration, and perceived combat readiness,’’ Military Psychology 14 (2002):
217–239.
40. John Eighmey, ‘‘Why do youth enlist? Identification of underlying themes,’’ Armed
Forces and Society, 32 (2006): 307–328.
41. Sophia Moskalenko, Clark R. McCauley and Paul Rozin, ‘‘Group identification
under conditions of threat: college students’ attachment to country, family, ethnicity, religion
and college before and after September 11, 2001,’’ Political Psychology 2 (2006): 77–98.
42. Robert B. Cialdini, Alan Levy, Peter Herman, Lynn T. Koslowski, and Richard E.
Petty, ‘‘Elastic shifts of opinion: Determinants of direction and durability,’’ Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology 34 (1976): 663–672.
43. Robert B. Cialdini and Kenneth D. Richardson, ‘‘Two indirect tactics of image
management: Basking and Blasting,’’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39
(1980): 406–415.
44. Robert B. Cialdini and Maralou E. De Nicholas, ‘‘Self-presentation by association,’’
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 57 (1989): 626–631.
45. Jeff Greenberg, Tom Pyszczynski, and Sheldon Solomon, ‘‘The Causes and Conse-
quences of a Need for Self-Esteem: A Terror Management Theory,’’ in Roy F. Baumeister,
ed., Public Self and Private Self (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1986).
46. Barbara A. Mullin and Michael A. Hogg, ‘‘Dimensions of subjective uncertainty in
social identification and minimal group discrimination,’’ British Journal of Social Psychology
37 (1998): 345–365.
47. Michael A. Hogg and Barbara A. Mullin, ‘‘Joining Groups to Reduce Uncertainty:
Subjective Uncertainty Reduction and Group Identification,’’ in Dominic Abrams and
Michael A. Hogg, eds., Social Identity and Social Cognition (Blackwell, 1999).
48. Charles Tilly, From Mobilization to Revolution (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley,
1978).
49. Doug McAdam, Sidney Tarrow, and Charles Tilly, Dynamics of Contention
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
50. William A. Gamson, The strategy of social protest (Homewood, IL: Dorsey, 1975).
51. Ibid. (p. 58).
52. Moskalenko et al. (see note 41 above).
53. Richard W. Robins, Holly M. Hendin, and Kali H. Trzesniewski, ‘‘Measuring global
self-esteem: Construct validation of a single-item measure and the Rosenberg Self-Esteem
Scale,’’ Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 27 (2001): 151–161.
54. Moskalenko et al. (see note 41 above).
55. Robins et al. (see note 53 above).
56. Eric Hoffer, The True Believer (New York: Harper and Row, 1951).
57. John Sabini, Social Psychology (New York: Norton & Co, 1992).
Activism-Radicalism Intention Scales 259
58. Donatella Della Porta, Social movements, political violence, and the state: A compara-
tive analysis of Italy and Germany (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1995).
59. Harry C. Triandis, Interpersonal behavior (Monterey, CA: Brooks=Cole, 1977).
60. Darryl J. Bem,. ‘‘Self-perception theory,’’ in Leon Berkowitz, ed., Advances in Experi-
mental Social Psychology, Vol. 6 (New York: Academic Press, 1972), 1–62.
61. Robert B. Cialdini and David A. Schroeder, ‘‘Increasing contributions by legitimizing
paltry contributions,’’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 34 (1976): 599–604.
62. Elliott Aronson and Judson Mills, ‘‘The effect of severity of initiation on liking for a
group,’’ Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 59 (1959): 177–181.
63. Eamonn Ferguson and Peter I. Bibby, ‘‘Predicting future blood donor returns: Past
behavior, intentions, and observer effects,’’ Health Psychology 21 (2002): 513–518.
64. Judith A. Ouellette and Wendy Wood, ‘‘Habit and intention in everyday life: The
multiple processes by which past behavior predicts future behavior,’’ Psychological Bulletin
124 (1998): 54–74.
65. Corning and Myers (see note 13 above).
66. Ouellette and Wood (see note 64 above).
67. Ferguson and Bibby (see note 63 above).
68. Corning and Myers (see note 13 above).
69. Deaux et al. (see note 30 above).
70. Foster and Matheson (see note 32 above).
71. Rollins and Hirsch (see note 33 above).
72. Gamson (see note 50 above).
73. Elliot (see note 6 above).
74. Baran (see note 7 above).
75. Ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken en Koninkrijksrelaties, ‘‘From dawa to jihad - the
various threats from radical Islam to the democratic legal order,’’ (translated from Dutch).
Publications (2007). Retrieved 1=24=08 from http://www.minbzk.nl/bzk2006uk/subjects/
public-safety/publications?ActI.
76. MI5 Security Service, ‘‘Countering International Terrorism: Tackling Radicalization,’’
(2007). Retrieved 1=24=08 from http://www.mi5.gov.uk/output/Page31.html.
77. Ronald A. Francisco, ‘‘After the Massacre: Mobilization in the Wake of Harsh
Repression,’’ Mobilization: An International Quarterly 9 (2004): 107–126.
78. Karen Rasler, ‘‘Concessions, Repression, and Political Protest in the Iranian Revolu-
tion,’’ American Sociological Review 61 (1996): 132–152.
79. Della Porta (see note 58 above).
80. ICM, ‘‘Muslims Poll July 2005’’ (2005). Retrieved March 5, 2006, from http://
www.icmresearch.co.uk/reviews/2005/Guardian%20%20muslims%20july05/Guardian%
20Muslims%20jul05.asp
260 S. Moskalenko and C. McCauley