Psychology and Health
Vol. 26, No. 11, November 2011, 1479–1498
A refined taxonomy of behaviour change techniques to
help people change their physical activity and healthy
eating behaviours: The CALO-RE taxonomy
Susan Michie a *, Stefanie Ashfordb , Falko F. Sniehottac ,
Stephan U. Dombrowski d , Alex Bishop b and David P. French b
a
Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK; b
Applied Research Centre in Health and
Lifestyle Interventions, Coventry University, Priory Street, Coventry CV1 5FB, UK;
c Centre for Translational Research in Public Health, Institute of Health and Society,
Medical Faculty, Newcastle University, Richardson Road, Newcastle, NE2 4AX, UK;
d
Health Services Research Unit, University of Aberdeen,
Foresterhill, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, UK
(Received 30 April 2010; final version received 10 November 2010)
Background: Current reporting of intervention content in published
research articles and protocols is generally poor, with great diversity of
terminology, resulting in low replicability. This study aimed to extend the
scope and improve the reliability of a 26-item taxonomy of behaviour
change techniques developed by Abraham and Michie [Abraham, C. and
Michie, S. (2008). A taxonomy of behaviour change techniques used in
interventions. Health Psychology, 27(3), 379–387.] in order to optimise the
reporting and scientific study of behaviour change interventions. Methods:
Three UK study centres collaborated in applying this existing taxonomy to
two systematic reviews of interventions to increase physical activity and
healthy eating. The taxonomy was refined in iterative steps of (1) coding
intervention descriptions, and assessing inter-rater reliability, (2) identify-
ing gaps and problems across study centres and (3) refining the labels and
definitions based on consensus discussions. Results: Labels and definitions
were improved for all techniques, conceptual overlap between categories
was resolved, some categories were split and 14 techniques were added,
resulting in a 40-item taxonomy. Inter-rater reliability, assessed on
50 published intervention descriptions, was good (kappa ¼ 0.79).
Conclusions: This taxonomy can be used to improve the specification of
interventions in published reports, thus improving replication, implemen-
tation and evidence syntheses. This will strengthen the scientific study of
behaviour change and intervention development.
Keywords: behaviour change; techniques; taxonomy; interventions;
reporting; health behaviours
*Corresponding author. Email: s.michie@ucl.ac.uk
ISSN 0887–0446 print/ISSN 1476–8321 online
ß 2011 Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08870446.2010.540664
http://www.tandfonline.com
Background
In order to improve the effectiveness of interventions to change behaviour, such
as physical activity and healthy eating, it is necessary to replicate and accumulate
evidence across empirical studies. This is not straightforward, as interventions to
change health-related behaviours are usually complex, comprising many, often
interacting components (Craig et al., 2008). Systematic reviews of the effects of
physical activity and healthy eating interventions on behaviour or health outcomes
often conclude that both the interventions as well as the effect sizes are extremely
heterogeneous (Avenell et al., 2004; Lemmens, Oenema, Klepp, Henriksen, & Brug,
2008; Ogilvie et al., 2007). While some interventions are indeed highly effective
in changing behaviour and relevant health outcomes, others fail to achieve such
effects. Replication, accumulation and application of evidence depend on the ability
to reliably specify the details of intervention content both for primary research and
for secondary evidence syntheses.
Current reporting of interventions in published evaluations falls short of the
detail required for reliably identifying intervention content (Dombrowski, Sniehotta,
Avenell, & Coyne, 2007; Glasziou, Meats, Heneghan, & Shepperd, 2008; Michie,
Fixen, Grimshaw, & Eccles, 2009) and hence limits the possibility of identifying the
effective ingredients within interventions (Michie, Abraham, Wittington, McAteer,
& Gupta, 2009). Reporting of intervention content is often brief and imprecise
with interventions being broadly characterised as, for example, ‘behavioural
counselling’, ‘Cognitive Behavioural Therapy’ or ‘motivational strategies’. In some
cases, reporting does not mention content but, instead, describes mode of
intervention delivery such as ‘face to face’ or ‘nurse delivered’ or in terms of number
of intervention sessions.
Where detail of intervention content is provided, such as in published
intervention protocols, terminology is variable across intervention descriptions;
the same label may be applied to different behaviour change techniques (BCTs)
or different labels applied to the same technique. An example of the former is
‘behavioural counselling’ described both as ‘educating patients about the benefits of
lifestyle change, encouraging them, and suggesting what changes could be made’
(Steptoe, Kerry, Rink, & Hilton, 2001, p. 266) and ‘feedback on self-monitoring
record, reinforcement, recommendations for change, answers to questions, and
general support’ (Tate, Jackvony, & Wing, 2003, p. 1834). Similarly, interventions
reporting the use of ‘goal setting’ for dietary and physical activity behaviour change
interventions differ substantially from each other (Shilts, Horowitz, & Townsend,
2004) and ‘barrier identification’ has been described as ‘motivational messages’ that
highlight ‘perceived benefits of exercise while addressing perceived barriers and
strategies to overcome those barriers’ (Richardson et al., 2007) or ‘practical
strategies’ used to increase ‘the uptake of dietary and physical activity recommen-
dations, given that people are concurrently managing family, work and study;
may have limited finances; . . .’ (Pettman et al., 2008).
Standardised definitions of techniques are required to put the study of behaviour
change onto a more scientific footing for at least four reasons:
First, they are required to allow identification of which techniques contribute to
intervention effectiveness. Accumulating evidence of what works is a necessary part
of developing more effective and parsimonious complex interventions. Standardised
definitions are invaluable for evidence synthesis in systematic literature reviews;
1480 S. Michie et al.
without them, it is unclear how intervention content should be categorised in meta-
analyses across studies (Gardner, Whittington, McAteer, Eccles, & Michie, 2010).
Second, they allow authors of interventions to accurately describe interventions in a
way that faithfully represents the implemented BCTs, thereby allowing accurate
appraisal of the scientific evidence produced (e.g. Arau´ jo-Soares, McIntyre,
MacLennan, & Sniehotta, 2009). Third, standardisation is necessary for reliably
linking BCTs to mechanisms of action, and therefore understanding how interven-
tions work (Michie, 2008). This allows intervention effectiveness to be optimised by
providing knowledge about how techniques may be effectively combined together
and how intervention effects are likely to generalise across situations. Moreover,
such information is fundamental to theoretical development (Sniehotta, 2009b) and
requires linking intervention techniques with theoretical constructs (e.g. Ashford,
Edmunds, & French, 2010) and theories of behaviour change (e.g. Michie, Johnston,
Francis, Hardeman, & Eccles, 2008). Without a reliable method of specifying
techniques, such mapping is impossible. Finally, standard technique definitions
are required for effective implementation of interventions from research protocols to
practice ‘in the field’. By ensuring that effective intervention techniques are in fact
delivered as intended such definitions facilitate implementation of evidence-based
practice across different health care contexts.
Attention has increasingly been paid to the standardised reporting of intervention
content and their component BCTs (Abraham & Michie, 2008; Workgroup for
Intervention Development and Evaluation Research (WIDER, 2008) at http://
interventiondesign.co.uk), with the aim of improving reporting of behaviour change
interventions, and thereby advancing the science of behaviour change (Michie,
Rothman, & Sheeran, 2007). To identify specific BCTs contributing to intervention
effectiveness, a standardised 26-item taxonomy to classify BCTs in physical activity
and healthy eating interventions has been developed (Abraham & Michie, 2008).
This taxonomy demonstrated reliability in judging the presence or absence of
26 techniques in three systematic reviews mainly of interventions aimed at changing
physical activity and dietary behaviours. The taxonomy has had immediate impact
on the field.
To date, the Abraham and Michie (2008) taxonomy has been used in systematic
reviews (de Bruin, Viechtbauer, Hospers, Schaalma, & Kok, 2009; Jacobs-van der
Bruggen et al., 2009; Michie, Abraham, et al., 2009; Renz & Newton, 2009), reports
of intervention development and study protocols (Biran et al., 2009; Sanchez et al.,
2009), empirical reports; (Albada, Van Dulmen, Otten, Bensing, & Ausems, 2009;
Arau´ jo-Soares et al., 2009; Gardner et al., 2010; Hanbury, Wallace, & Clark, 2009)
and several editorials and position papers (Hagger, 2009; Marks, 2009; Michie,
Fixen, et al., 2009). This study has contributed to the advancement of behavioural
science and clarified the evidence base about behaviour change. For example,
Michie, Jochelson, Markham, and Bridle (2009) reviewed the effectiveness of
interventions to reduce smoking or increase physical activity and/or healthy eating
practices in low income groups and found that effective interventions tended to use
fewer BCTs. Two large-scale systematic reviews using the taxonomy, and conducting
meta-regression showed that interventions prompting participants to self-monitor
their behaviour were more effective in achieving behaviour change. In line with this,
both reviews found that interventions using more techniques associated with Control
Theory (Carver & Scheier, 1998) achieved larger effects (Dombrowski, Sniehotta,
Avenell, MacLennan, & Arau´ jo-Soares, in press; Michie, Abraham, et al., 2009).
Psychology and Health 1481
These examples show how the availability of a standardised and reliable taxonomy
of behaviour change techniques may help towards the identification of ‘active
ingredients’ through reviews of the literature, and facilitate comparisons between
reviews.
Despite this successful uptake, a descriptive taxonomy of BCTs is not written
in stone. Additional iterations are needed to optimise reliability, comprehensiveness,
theoretical coherence and relevance based on applications to different studies in
different research centres (Abraham & Michie, 2008). Whilst the Abraham and
Michie (2008) taxonomy marks a significant step forward in specifying intervention
content, researchers have identified opportunities for further improvement. For
example, the systematic review of interventions targeting low-income groups
mentioned above (Michie, Jochelson, et al., 2009) identified two additional BCTs:
prompt use of imagery and environmental restructuring.
This research was a collaboration of three study centres arising from two
independent research projects applying this taxonomy to systematically review
interventions to increase physical activity and healthy eating. The collaboration
aimed to extend the existing taxonomy to improve its comprehensiveness, ease of use
and reliability, by clarifying definitions and labels and identifying and adding
additional techniques. Similar issues arose in the two reviews, suggesting that
findings generalise beyond the studies included in these reviews.
Methods
The research teams engaged in an iterative process of taxonomy refinement based on
(1) identifying problems (within teams), (2) revising taxonomy (within and across
teams) and (3) using a revised and extended version and calculating inter-rater
reliability (within teams) and repeating the cycle until the taxonomy categories were
conceptually clear and unambiguous and reliability was good. There were four
iterations of this cycle that included coding one or two papers, calculating kappas
and revising the taxonomy following group discussion of the three research teams.
These refinements, such as revising existing technique labels and descriptions and
adding extra ones that had been identified in the reviews, were agreed using an expert
consensus approach, i.e. final definitions were agreed by all lead researchers in all
three centres, based on the previous iteration and behaviour change theory.
The Abraham and Michie (2008) taxonomy was used as a starting point to code
behaviour change intervention descriptions reported in systematic reviews conducted
by two separate UK research groups. The interventions in these reviews targeted,
respectively, (1) increasing physical activity and healthy eating in obese adults with
additional risk factors for morbidity (Dombrowski et al., in press) and (2) increasing
self-efficacy to promote lifestyle and recreational physical activity (Ashford et al.,
2010; Ashford & French, 2010). These reviews comprised a total of 72 studies
(n ¼ 44, ranging from 1–16 techniques and n ¼ 28, ranging from 1–12 techniques,
respectively) and ranged across a variety of populations, behaviours and settings.
Both research teams used the Abraham and Michie (2008) 26-item BCTs
taxonomy to code the content of the interventions included in the systematic reviews
they conducted. For full details of the application of the taxonomy in each of these
reviews, see the references cited above. The researchers identified and recorded
problems with the use of the 26-item taxonomy, including a lack of clarity for certain
1482 S. Michie et al.
techniques and their definitions, overlap between categories and missing categories.
The method used by the study teams are outlined below. Four criteria were used to
identify areas for possible improvement.
(1) Each time a discrepancy between coders emerged, the reasons for this were
identified and possible solutions outlined.
(2) Each time relevant intervention content was identified, which was not
covered by the 2008 taxonomy the inclusion of an additional BCT was
considered.
(3) Each time intervention content coded as the same BCT showing variability
in terms of behaviour change strategy and/or the assumed process of change,
the definition of separate BCTs or sub-classifications was considered.
(4) The definitions for all BCTs with unsatisfactory inter-rater agreement in
either the original 2008 paper, the Ashford et al. (2010) paper or the
Dombrowski et al. (in press) paper were reviewed for improvements.
A solution was agreed on only when all teams considered that it offered
acceptable clarity and was sufficiently unambiguous to allow reliable coding.
Aberdeen team
Coding was based on the most comprehensive published intervention descriptions or
freely available published protocols and full manuals. All coding was made
independently by two researchers, Dombrowski (SUD) & Arau´ jo-Soares (VAS).
Initially, a selection of eight papers excluded from the review was coded for training
purposes and results were discussed between SUD, VAS and Sniehotta (FFS).
In addition, the Aberdeen team used the 26-item taxonomy to describe a complex
intervention for physical activity changes in an original report (Arau´ jo-Soares et al.,
2009). Based on these experiences and subsequent team discussions, a list of
questions that remained unresolved based on the published taxonomy and coding
manual was further discussed with Charles Abraham and Susan Michie. Based
on these iterations, modifications and additional specifications, a slightly revised
26-item taxonomy was used to code the Dombrowski et al. (in press) review.
Coventry team
Three researchers, Ashford (SA), Edmunds (JE) and French (DPF) independently
coded a selection of five intervention descriptions using the original 26-item
taxonomy. Subsequent discussions of this coding by the researchers resulted in a list
of problems and unresolved issues which, along with a list of unresolved questions
from the Aberdeen team, was the basis for the first stage of revision.
All study teams discussed and resolved the issues that arose from the use of the
taxonomy in Aberdeen and Coventry as described earlier. Following this, a first
revised version of the taxonomy was developed with additional BCTs and revised
definitions. Further iterations of the taxonomy were produced, based on email
correspondence between the three study teams, culminating in a 39-item version of
the taxonomy.
The penultimate version of the taxonomy (39 items) was tested for reliability by
one of the study teams (Coventry). Two independent raters (SA and Bishop (AB))
Psychology and Health 1483
underwent four cycles of an iterative process of independent coding, calculation
of kappas and discussion of differences and further refinement of the taxonomy
descriptions, using 10 intervention descriptions. Once good agreement was reached,
SA and AB coded the intervention and control groups of the remaining 18 studies
in the Ashford et al. (2010) review, followed by re-coding the 10 studies previously
coded. Despite achieving good inter-rater reliability, this version was slightly revised
based on the problems encountered following completion of the coding for the
Ashford et al review.
Results
Aberdeen findings
The Aberdeen team found several difficulties. Table 1 lists these by BCTs, as well
as the solutions found based on discussions within the Aberdeen team and with the
authors of the initial taxonomy. It was agreed not to code the presence of a BCTs
unless the description was clear and did not require inference, which helped to
resolve several disagreements.
This study resulted in a slightly revised 26-item taxonomy with further agreed
specification and a list of additional changes for future iterations of the taxonomy.
The resultant inter-rater agreement was ‘good’ (Altman, 1991) with kappas ranging
from 0.59–0.78 (Dombrowski et al., in press).
Coventry findings
The Coventry team identified similar problems as the Aberdeen team (Table 1). The
inter-rater reliability when using the original Abraham and Michie (2008) taxonomy
was kappa ¼ 0.45–0.69 across pairs of raters, with a mean of 0.57. This taxonomy
was revised, based on problems encountered in both Aberdeen and Coventry, and
a 39-item taxonomy was produced, and used to code all intervention descriptions.
Examples of additional problems found during the final iteration of coding of
28 intervention studies using the revised 39-item taxonomy, and the solutions to
these problems, are shown in Table 2.
Coding of the intervention descriptions using later versions of the taxonomy
yielded better inter-rater reliability than those found using the original version,
reaching a mean kappa of 0.79. Despite this good inter-rater reliability, further use
identified further aspects to improve. The final version of 40 BCTs, with improved
labels and definitions of existing BCTs, and one additional BCTs, is shown in
Table 3.
Discussion
A collaboration of three study centres applying a 26-item taxonomy of BCTs
(Abraham & Michie, 2008) to intervention descriptions in two systematic reviews of
interventions to increase physical activity and healthy eating (Ashford et al., 2010;
Dombrowski et al., in press) has produced a more comprehensive, well specified and
more clearly labelled taxonomy of 40 items, with good reliability: the ‘Coventry,
Aberdeen & London – Refined’ (CALO-RE) taxonomy. The 2008 taxonomy was
seen as a first step towards establishing a common language for intervention
1484 S. Michie et al.
Table 1. Problems in applying the 26-item Abraham and Michie (2008) taxonomy to the Dombrowski et al. (in press) and Ashford et al. (2010) reviews
and modifications/additional specifications made to improve coding reliability.
Techniques (Abraham &
Michie, 2008) Problems Additional specifications
T1. Provide information
on behaviour-health link
T2. Provide information
on consequences
Difficulty in separating both techniques when based on the
coding manual
T1 (health risk information – which includes consequences)
implies T2 but not vice versa, in other words technique
1 is a special instance of technique 2
Code technique 1 also when patients receive material that
reinforces the essentials of the relevant behaviours
T4. Prompt intention
formation
If the intervention description states that ‘participants were
encouraged to . . .’ is this an instance of technique 4
(prompt intention formation)?
No, participants have to be explicitly encouraged to form
intentions/make plans, commit to doing the task etc.
Also coded when the intervention description referred to
the phrase ‘goal setting’ or e.g. ‘participants were
encouraged on the selection of 2–3 goals’
T10. Prompt specific
goal setting
The labelling of this technique is unfortunate and might be
better labelled as ‘Action Planning’ T4 (intention for-
mation) should actually be labelled ‘Goal Setting’
To be coded whenever a specific behaviour is linked to a
context (this context could also include another
behaviour, i.e. replacing one behaviour with
another one)
T7. Set graded tasks Several studies referred to gradual weight loss through
decreasing dietary calorie intake and exercise behaviour
This technique was only rated when the graded tasks we
behavioural
T11. Prompt review of
behavioural goals
Initial disagreements in the training codings When the description refers to the setting of further goals
once the ones that have been set previously are met it was
rated it as an instance of this technique as only by
reviewing the goals and the progress towards it a decision
to set further goals can be achieved
T8. Provide instruction Initial rater disagreement in the training codings We only rated this technique when it was explicitly
mentioned that people were instructed how to do
something (as opposed to what to do). Intervention
descriptions like ‘participants were instructed to use a
low fat diet . . .’ were not rated as T8 as they fall short of
describing that people were instructed how to do it’
However, a pamphlet or manual that deals with topics
(continued )
Psychology and Health 1485
Table 1. Continued.
Techniques (Abraham &
Michie, 2008) Problems Additional specifications
such as dealing with pressure to eat, planning healthy
meals, eating away from home, instruction on suitable
clothing/equipment for exercise etc as well as cooking
and exercise classes were rated as T8
Examples of what constitutes this technique were later
included in the technique description
T12. Prompt self-moni-
toring of behaviour
Self-monitoring techniques can be applied to monitor
behaviour or behavioural proxies such as glucose
monitoring, weight monitoring). Would monitoring
physiological variables associated with behaviour be an
instance of T12 (self-monitoring)?
Not in the Abraham and Michie (2008) taxonomy but it
was agreed that such techniques should be covered by
future iterations of the taxonomy
T13. Provide feedback
on performance
Does T13 also include commenting on past behaviour
(i.e. behaviour performed before the intervention) or
only behaviour which has been performed as a result of
the intervention
Yes, baseline feedback on current performance as an initial
step in an intervention would count as T13, not feedback
on previous self-reported behaviour
T14. Provide contingent
rewards
Rewards are offered contingent to different behaviours
(target behaviour, attendance and general efforts) and
proxies (e.g. weight loss). Some interventions provide
timely rewards in a way that participants actually
experience the rewards during the interventions; other
interventions create the anticipation of rewards for
successful achievement of the behavioural targets at the
end of the program
Many interventions use self-rewards. Clarification was
needed when to code this techniques and whether it
would be useful to have sub-codings indicating if
behaviour or proxies were rewarded and if the rewards
were received during the intervention or after
The Abraham and Michie Taxonomy focuses of rewards
contingent to performing the target behaviour, but it was
agreed that future iterations should include provision of
reward contingent to other achievements. Moreover,
it was agreed that future iterations should specify if the
rewards were received during the intervention or
anticipated and received after the completion of the
intervention
1486 S. Michie et al.
T18. Use of follow-up
prompts
Problems defining if contacts are part of an extended
intervention (phasing out) or follow-up prompts?
The taxonomy authors acknowledged that this is a problem
without being able to suggest improvements
T19. Provide opportuni-
ties for social
comparison
If the intervention is held (or partly held) in groups does
this automatically point to T19? This would mean that a
mode of delivery equals a technique?
Only if the groups offer the opportunities to observe others
trying the behaviour e.g. an exercise class would always
imply T19
T23. Relapse prevention Initial disagreements in training codings
If ‘relapse prevention’ is stated, but occurs before behaviour
has been initiated can this be coded as relapse
prevention?
This technique was also rated when studies referred to
coping planning or to intervention work on behavioural
maintenance even if relapse prevention was not
specifically named in the description
The technique was coded if the name was explicitly stated,
regardless of whether this took place before or after the
initiation of behaviour
T24. Stress management Is ‘mindfulness meditation’, ‘yoga’ and ‘guided visualisa-
tion’ an example of T24?
Only if the author claims that the techniques reduce anxiety
or stress as part of an intervention designed to promote
another identified behaviour
T25. Motivational
interviewing
Initial disagreements in training codings due to the fact that
motivational interviewing is heterogeneous in itself and
usually involves several other techniques
Motivational interviewing was only rated when it was
explicitly named as an intervention technique
Other observations/
problems
Tailoring of techniques Is specific tailoring (e.g. to ethnic group, age group, stage
according to a stage model or individual risk profile) an
intervention technique in itself?
Tailoring as such is not a technique but a specification how
and when techniques are applied. It is, therefore, not
coded within the taxonomy
Techniques missing in
the taxonomy
Techniques
– ‘stimulus control’
– ‘environmental control’
– use of imagery
– environmental restructuring
– ‘emotion/mood control/self-regulation’
– ‘environmental change, e.g. providing discount on
services such as public leisure facilities’ are not included
in the taxonomy
These are essential components of some interventions, and
provided the impetus for substantially revised and
expanding the 26-item taxonomy as described in this
article
Psychology and Health 1487
Table 2. Additional issues raised during coding papers in the Ashford et al. (2010) review using the 39-item taxonomy.
Techniques
(39-item taxonomy) Problems Solutions
Reinforcing effort or progress
towards behaviour
Concept of self-reward not present Concept of self-reward now included within this
technique
Information on consequences
of the behaviour for the
individual
Information on consequences may be tailored to a group
of individuals e.g. mothers of young children.
New description now reflects that the information can
be tailored at the group or the individual level
Provide instruction Definition is unclear as to what can be considered
instruction
Technique now broken down into two techniques:
– Provide information on where and when to perform
the behaviour
– Provide instruction on how to perform the
behaviour
Prompt identification as role
model
Can this include putting up some leaflets encouraging
others to walk with them?
Removed the phrase ‘write a persuasive leaflet’ as this
was misleading
Action planning Interventions describe details of how, when and
where to act e.g. a specific exercise prescription.
However, these are not traditional action planning/
implementation intention techniques
Technique definition reworded: if the three dimensions
of action planning are attended to in the intervention
i.e. when, where and how to act, this technique can be
considered present
1488 S. Michie et al.
Table 3. Behaviour change technique definitions.
1. Provide information on consequences of behaviour in general
Information about the relationship between the behaviour and its possible or likely
consequences in the general case, usually based on epidemiological data, and not
personalised for the individual (contrast with technique 2).
2. Provide information on consequences of behaviour to the individual
Information about the benefits and costs of action or inaction to the individual or
tailored to a relevant group based on that individual’s characteristics (i.e. demo-
graphics, clinical, behavioural or psychological information). This can include any
costs/benefits and not necessarily those related to health, e.g. feelings.
3. Provide information about others’ approval
Involves information about what other people think about the target person’s
behaviour. It clarifies whether others will like, approve or disapprove of what the
person is doing or will do.
NB: Check that any instance does not also involve techniques 1 (Provide information
on consequences of behaviour in general) or 2 (Provide information on consequences
of behaviour to the individual) or 4 (Provide normative information about others’
behaviour).
4. Provide normative information about others’ behaviour
Involves providing information about what other people are doing i.e. indicates that
a particular behaviour or sequence of behaviours is common or uncommon amongst
the population or amongst a specified group – presentation of case studies of a few
others is not normative information.
NB: this concerns other people’s actions and is distinct from the provision of
information about others’ approval (technique 3 (Provide information about others’
approval)).
5. Goal setting (behaviour)
The person is encouraged to make a behavioural resolution (e.g. take more exercise next
week). This is directed towards encouraging people to decide to change or maintain
change.
NB: This is distinguished from technique 6 (goal setting – outcome) and 7 (action
planning) as it does not involve planning exactly how the behaviour will be done and
either when or where the behaviour or action sequence will be performed. Where the
text only states that goal setting was used without specifying the detail of action
planning involved then this would be an example of this technique (not technique 7
(action planning)). If the text states that ‘goal setting’ was used if it is not clear from
the report, if the goal setting was related to behaviour or to other outcomes,
technique 6 should be coded. This includes sub-goals or preparatory behaviours
and/or specific contexts in which the behaviour will be performed. The behaviour in
this technique will be directly related to or be a necessary condition for the target
behaviour (e.g. shopping for healthy eating; buying equipment for physical activity).
NB: check if techniques applied to preparatory behaviours should also be coded as
instances of technique 9 (Set graded tasks).
6. Goal setting (outcome)
The person is encouraged to set a general goal that can be achieved by behavioural
means but is not defined in terms of behaviour (e.g. to reduce blood pressure or
lose/maintain weight), as opposed to a goal based on changing behaviour as such.
The goal may be an expected consequence of one or more behaviours, but is not a
behaviour per se (see also techniques 5 (Goal setting – behaviour) and 7 (Action
planning)). This technique may co-occur with technique 5 if goals for both behaviour
and other outcomes are set.
7. Action planning
Involves detailed planning of what the person will do including, as a minimum, when,
in which situation and/or where to act. ‘When’ may describe frequency (such as how
many times a day/week or duration (e.g. for how long). The exact content of action
(continued )
Psychology and Health 1489
Table 3. Continued.
plans may or may not be described, in this case code as this technique if it is stated
that the behaviour is planned contingent to a specific situation or set of situations
even if exact details are not present.
NB: The terms ‘goal setting’ or ‘action plan’ are not enough to ensure inclusion of this
technique unless it is clear that plans involve linking behavioural responses to specific
situational cues, when only described as ‘goal setting’ or ‘action plan’ without the
above detail it should be regarded as applications of techniques 5 and 6.
8. Barrier identification/problem solving
This presumes having formed an initial plan to change behaviour. The person is
prompted to think about potential barriers and identify the ways of overcoming them.
Barriers may include competing goals in specified situations. This may be described
as ‘problem solving’. If it is problem solving in relation to the performance of a
behaviour, then it counts as an instance of this technique. Examples of barriers may
include behavioural, cognitive, emotional, environmental, social and/or physical
barriers.
NB: Closely related to techniques 7 (action planning) and 9 (set graded task), but
involves a focus on specific obstacles to performance. It contrasts with technique
35 (relapse prevention/coping planning), which is about maintaining behaviour that
has already been changed.
9. Set graded tasks
Breaking down the target behaviour into smaller easier to achieve tasks and enabling
the person to build on small successes to achieve target behaviour. This may include
increments towards target behaviour or incremental increases from baseline
behaviour.
NB: The key difference to technique 7 (Action planning) lies in planning to perform
a sequence of preparatory actions (e.g. remembering to take gym kit to work), task
components or target behaviours which are in a logical sequence or increase in
difficulty over time – as opposed to planning ‘if-then’ contingencies when/where to
perform behaviours. General references to increasing physical activity as intervention
goal are not instances of this technique.
10. Prompt review of behavioural goals
Involves a review or analysis of the extent to which previously set behavioural goals
(e.g. take more exercise next week) were achieved. In most cases, this will follow
previous goal setting (see technique 5, ‘goal setting-behaviour’) and an attempt to
act on those goals, followed by a revision or readjustment of goals, and/or means
to attain them.
NB: Check if any instance also involves techniques 6 (goal setting – behaviour),
8 (barrier identification/problem solving), 9 (set graded tasks) or 11 (prompt review
of outcome goals).
11. Prompt review of outcome goals
Involves a review or analysis of the extent to which previously set outcome goals (e.g. to
reduce blood pressure or lose/maintain weight) were achieved. In most cases, this will
follow previous goal setting (see technique 6, goal setting-outcome’) and an attempt
to act on those goals, followed by a revision of goals, and/or means to attain them.
NB: Check that any instance does not also involve techniques 5 (goal setting –
outcome), 8 (barrier identification/problem solving), 9 (set graded tasks) or
10 (prompt review of behavioural goals).
12. Prompt rewards contingent on effort or progress towards behaviour
Involves the person using praise or rewards for attempts at achieving a behavioural goal.
This might include efforts made towards achieving the behaviour or progress made
in preparatory steps towards the behaviour, but not merely participation in
intervention. This can include self-reward.
(continued )
1490 S. Michie et al.
Table 3. Continued.
NB: This technique is not reinforcement for performing the target behaviour itself,
which is an instance of technique 13 (provide rewards contingent on successful
behaviour).
13. Provide rewards contingent on successful behaviour
Reinforcing successful performance of the specific target behaviour. This can include
praise and encouragement as well as material rewards but the reward/incentive must
be explicitly linked to the achievement of the specific target behaviour i.e. the person
receives the reward if they perform the specified behaviour but not if they do not
perform the behaviour. This can include self-reward. Provisions of rewards for
completing intervention components or materials are not instances of this technique.
References to provision of incentives for being more physically active are not
instances of this technique unless information about contingency to the performance
of the target behaviour is provided.
NB: Check the distinction between this and techniques 7 (action planning) and
17 (prompt self-monitoring of behavioural outcome) and 19 (provide feedback on
performance).
14. Shaping
Contingent rewards are first provided for any approximation to the target behaviour
e.g. for any increase in physical activity. Then, later, only a more demanding
performance, e.g. brisk walking for 10 min on 3 days a week would be rewarded.
Thus, this is graded use of contingent rewards over time.
15. Prompting generalisation of a target behaviour
Once behaviour is performed in a particular situation, the person is encouraged or
helped to try it in another situation. The idea is to ensure that the behaviour is not
tied to one situation but becomes a more integrated part of the person’s life that can
be performed at a variety of different times and in a variety of contexts.
16. Prompt self-monitoring of behaviour
The person is asked to keep a record of specified behaviour(s) as a method for changing
behaviour. This should be an explicitly stated intervention component, as opposed to
occurring as part of completing measures for research purposes. This could e.g. take
the form of a diary or completing a questionnaire about their behaviour, in terms of
type, frequency, duration and/or intensity. Check the distinction between this and
techniques 17 (prompt self-monitoring of behavioural outcome).
17. Prompt self-monitoring of behavioural outcome
The person is asked to keep a record of specified measures expected to be influenced by
the behaviour change, e.g. blood pressure, blood glucose, weight loss, physical fitness.
NB: It must be reported as part of the intervention, rather than only as an outcome
measure. Check the distinction between this and techniques 16 (Prompt self-
monitoring of behaviour).
18. Prompting focus on past success
Involves instructing the person to think about or list previous successes in performing
the behaviour (or parts of it).
NB: This is not just encouragement but a clear focus on the person’s past behaviour.
It is also not feedback because it refers to behaviour preceded the intervention.
19. Provide feedback on performance
This involves providing the participant with data about their own recorded behaviour
(e.g. following technique 16 (prompt self-monitoring of behaviour)) or commenting
on a person’s behavioural performance (e.g. identifying a discrepancy with between
behavioural performance and a set goal – see techniques 5 (Goal setting – behaviour)
and 7 (action planning) – or a discrepancy between one’s own performance in relation
to others’ – note this could also involve technique 28 (Facilitate social comparison).
20. Provide information on where and when to perform the behaviour
(continued )
Psychology and Health 1491
Table 3. Continued.
Involves telling the person about when and where they might be able to perform the
behaviour this e.g. tips on places and times participants can access local exercise
classes. This can be in either verbal or written form.
NB: Check whether there are also instances of technique 21 (Provide instruction on how
to perform the behaviour).
21. Provide instruction on how to perform the behaviour
Involves telling the person how to perform behaviour or preparatory behaviours, either
verbally or in written form. Examples of instructions include; how to use gym
equipment (without getting on and showing the participant), instruction on suitable
clothing, and tips on how to take action Showing a person how to perform a
behaviour without verbal instruction would be an instance of technique 22 only.
NB: Check whether there are also instances of techniques 5, 7, 8, 9 and 22. Instructions
to follow a specific diet or programme of exercise without instructions how to
perform the behaviours are not included in this definition. Cooking and exercise
classes as well as personal trainers and recipes should always be coded as this
technique, but may also be coded as 22 (model/demonstrate the behaviour).
22. Model/Demonstrate the behaviour
Involves showing the person how to perform a behaviour e.g. through physical or visual
demonstrations of behavioural performance, in person or remotely.
NB: This is distinct from just providing instruction (technique 21) because in
‘demonstration’ the person is able to observe the behaviour being enacted. This
technique and techniques 21 (Provide instruction on how to perform the behaviour)
and may be used separately or together. Instructing parents or peers to perform the
target behaviour is not an instance of this technique as fidelity would be uncertain.
23. Teach to use prompts/cues
The person is taught to identify environmental prompts which can be used to remind
them to perform the behaviour (or to perform an alternative, incompatible behaviour
in the case of behaviours to be reduced). Cues could include times of day, particular
contexts or technologies such as mobile phone alerts which prompt them to perform
the target behaviour.
NB: This technique could be used independently or in conjunction with techniques
5 (goal setting - behaviour) and 7 (action planning; see also 24 (environmental
restructuring)).
24. Environmental restructuring
The person is prompted to alter the environment in ways so that it is more supportive of
the target behaviour e.g. altering cues or reinforcers. For example, they might be
asked to lock up or throw away or their high calorie snacks or take their running
shoes to work. Interventions in which the interveners directly modify environmental
variables (e.g. the way food is displayed in shops, provision of sports facilities) are not
covered by this taxonomy and should be coded independently.
25. Agree behavioural contract
Must involve written agreement on the performance of an explicitly specified behaviour
so that there is a written record of the person’s resolution witnessed by another.
26. Prompt practice
Prompt the person to rehearse and repeat the behaviour or preparatory behaviours
numerous times. Note this will also include parts of the behaviour e.g. refusal skills in
relation to unhealthy snacks. This could be described as ‘building habits or routines’
but is still practice so long as the person is prompted to try the behaviour (or parts
of it) during the intervention or practice between intervention sessions, e.g. as
‘homework’.
27. Use of follow-up prompts
Intervention components are gradually reduced in intensity, duration and frequency
over time, e.g. letters or telephone calls instead of face to face and/or provided at
longer time intervals.
(continued )
1492 S. Michie et al.
Table 3. Continued.
28. Facilitate social comparison
Involves explicitly drawing attention to others’ performance to elicit comparisons.
NB: The fact the intervention takes place in a group setting, or have been placed
in groups on the basis of shared characteristics, does not necessarily mean social
comparison is actually taking place. Social support may also be encouraged in such
settings and this would then involve technique 29 (plan social support/social change).
Group classes may also involve instruction (technique 21 (provide instruction on how
to perform the behaviour)) demonstration (technique 22 (model/demonstrate the
behaviour)) and practice (technique 26 (prompt practice)).
29. Plan social support/social change
Involves prompting the person to plan how to elicit social support from other people to
help him/her achieve their target behaviour/outcome. This will include support
during interventions e.g. setting up a ‘buddy’ system or other forms of support and
following the intervention including support provided by the individuals delivering
the intervention, partner, friends and family.
30. Prompt identification as role model/position advocate
Involves focusing on how the person may be an example to others and affect their
behaviour, e.g. being a good example to children. Also includes providing
opportunities for participants to persuade others of the importance of adopting/
changing the behaviour, for example, giving a talk or running a peer-led session.
31. Prompt anticipated regret
Involves inducing expectations of future regret about the performance or non-
performance of a behaviour. This includes focusing on how the person will feel in the
future and specifically whether they will feel regret or feel sorry that they did or did
not take a different course of action. Do not also code instances of this technique as
the more generic providing information on consequences (techniques 1 (provide
information on consequences of behaviour in general and 2 (provide information on
consequences of behaviour to the individual)).
32. Fear arousal
Involves presentation of risk and/or mortality information relevant to the behaviour as
emotive images designed to evoke a fearful response (e.g. ‘smoking kills!’ or images of
the grim reaper). Do not also code instances of this technique as the more generic
providing information on consequences (techniques 1 (provide information on
consequences of behaviour in general) and 2 (provide information on consequences of
behaviour to the individual)).
33. Prompt self talk
Encourage the person to use talk to themselves (aloud or silently) before and during
planned behaviours to encourage, support and maintain action.
34. Prompt use of imagery
Teach the person to imagine successfully performing the behaviour or to imagine
finding it easy to perform the behaviour, including component or easy versions of the
behaviour. Distinct from recalling instances of previous success without imagery
(technique 18 (prompting focus on past success)).
35. Relapse prevention/coping planning
This relates to planning how to maintain behaviour that has been changed. The person
is prompted to identify in advance situations in which the changed behaviour may not
be maintained and develop strategies to avoid or manage those situations. Contrast
with techniques 7 (action planning) and 8 (barrier identification/problem solving)
which are about initiating behaviour change.
36. Stress management/emotional control training
This is a set of specific techniques (e.g. progressive relaxation) which do not target the
behaviour directly but seek to reduce anxiety and stress to facilitate the performance
of the behaviour. It might also include techniques designed to reduce negative
emotions or control mood or feelings that may interfere with performance of the
(continued )
Psychology and Health 1493
designers, reviewers and practitioners to specify the content of behaviour change
interventions across two behavioural domains (Abraham & Michie, 2008). Although,
the 2008 taxonomy was a step forward in defining intervention content, and
a necessary tool in advancing the science of behaviour change, this study shows
the importance of further systematic and rigorous development of this work.
The CALO-RE taxonomy is more comprehensive, with fewer conceptual problems
and less overlap between items, as well as clearer labels and definitions.
We recommend that primary and secondary researchers and those translating
research evidence into practice, use the CALO-RE taxonomy to specify behaviour
change interventions aimed at increasing physical activity and healthy eating.
Where necessary, authors may need to extend this taxonomy for their purposes and
provide detailed definition clarifying the changes made. We also recommend that they
take a similar approach to its development to that described here if the CALO-RE
taxonomy is found wanting, and consider extending it to other behavioural domains.
The extent to which CALO-RE will generalise without adaptation to other
investigations of physical activity and healthy eating is an empirical question.
Drawing on this study, a similarly specified taxonomy of 43 BCTs has been
developed for smoking cessation interventions (Michie, Hyder, Walia, & West,
2009), which is informing a national training programme of smoking cessation
Table 3. Continued.
behaviour, and/or to increase positive emotions that might help with the performance
of the behaviour.
NB: Check whether there are any instances of technique 8 (barrier identification/
problem solving), which includes identifying emotional barriers to performance,
in contrast to the current technique, which addresses stress and emotions, whether
they have been identified as barriers or not.
37. Motivational interviewing
This is a clinical method including a specific set of techniques involving prompting the
person to engage in change talk in order to minimise resistance and resolve
ambivalence to change (includes motivational counselling).
NB: Only rate this technique if explicitly referred to by name, not if one identifies
specific elements of it, this may happen if you have prior experience with this
technique.
38. Time management
This includes any technique designed to teach a person how to manage their time in
order to make time for the behaviour. These techniques are not directed towards
performance of target behaviour but rather seek to facilitate it by freeing up times
when it could be performed.
NB: Only rate this technique if explicitly referred to by name, not if one identifies
specific elements of it, this may happen if you have prior experience with this
technique.
39. General communication skills training
This includes any technique directed at general communication skills but not directed
towards a particular behaviour change. Often this may include role play and group
work focusing on listening skills or assertive skills.
NB: Practicing a particular behaviour-specific interpersonal negotiation e.g. refusal
skills in relation to cigarettes or alcohol would not be an instance of this technique.
40. Stimulate anticipation of future rewards
Create anticipation of future rewards without necessarily reinforcing behaviour
throughout the active period of the intervention. Code this technique when
participants are told at the onset that they will be rewarded based on behavioural
achievement.
1494 S. Michie et al.
specialists in England (http://www.ncsct.co.uk). The BCTs, within the smoking
taxonomy, have been reliably grouped into theoretically based functions of
behaviour change, as a step towards linking BCTs with mechanisms of action
(Michie, Churchill, & West, in press).
The four functions were: (1) directly addressing motivation e.g. providing
rewards contingent on abstinence, (2) maximising self-regulatory capacity or skills
e.g. facilitating barrier identification and problem solving, (3) promoting adjuvant
activities e.g. advising on stop-smoking medication and (4) supporting other BCTs
e.g. building general rapport.
This taxonomy has also been used in empirical research to analyse the protocols
of the English NHS Stop Smoking Services and investigate the association between
the inclusion of specific BCTs and 4-week smoking cessation outcomes, using data
collected by the Department of Health (West, Walia, Hyder, Shahab, & Michie,
2010). Nine of the BCTs were significantly associated with both self-reported and
CO-verified 4-week quit rates (e.g. strengthen ex-smoker identity, provide rewards
contingent on abstinence, advise on medication, measure CO) and a further five
were associated with CO-verified 4-week quit rates but not self-reported quit rates
(e.g. facilitate/advise on the use of social support, provide reassurance). The
development of a taxonomy of BCTs for interventions aimed at reducing excessive
alcohol intake is underway, part of a larger programme of work to develop a cross-
domain architecture of BCTs and a more comprehensive and sophisticated
taxonomy. Whilst the majority of BCTs are interchangeable between behaviours,
there are some that are domain specific e.g. ‘assess withdrawal symptoms’ is
appropriate only for addictive behaviours and ‘advise on stop-smoking medication’
and ‘measure CO’ are smoking-specific. Five BCTs were identified in relation to
physical activity and healthy eating which were not used for smoking cessation
or brief alcohol interventions. These reflect the fact that interventions for physical
activity and healthy eating are primarily about initiating behaviour whereas the
others are primarily about stopping behaviour. They were: ‘prompt focus on past
success’, ‘provide information on where and when to perform the behaviour’,
‘provide instruction on how to perform the behaviour’, ‘teach to use prompts and
cues’ and ‘shaping’. The examination of BCTs across behavioural domains does
allow the possible identification of BCTs found to be effective in one domain to be
considered for use in others. For example, ‘behavioural substitution’ occurred
in brief alcohol interventions but not for the other behaviours, and could be
potentially effective in interventions to reduce unhealthy snacking or in smoking
cessation interventions.
Taxonomies of BCTs are work in progress in developing useful methodological
tools for behavioural science. For example, researchers addressing other issues may
identify additional BCTs (e.g. feedback on progress towards achieving a behavioural
goal) or subdivisions within current BCTs (e.g. different types of feedback on
performance, such as behavioural, normative or comparative). As taxonomies of
BCTs become more comprehensive, there will be a trade-off between precision and
statistical power, particularly when using the taxonomy for meta-regression analyses
in systematic reviews. Using 40 items in a meta-regression would require consider-
able power, certainly more than most reviews of BCTs have had to date. A possible
solution for this problem is analysing clusters of conceptually coherent BCTs or the
collapsing of similar techniques according to the research question or application
(Michie, Abraham, et al., 2009).
Psychology and Health 1495
Part of our future programme of work is to develop and apply a methodology for
linking BCTs to mechanisms of action (theory). Whilst we have not attempted this
for the current taxonomy, this is essential to facilitate experimental tests of theory
and theory development based on intervention research (Abraham & Michie, 2008).
Establishing such links is not a trivial task. Many theories of behaviour hypothesise
causal antecedents of behaviour (social, cognitive and/or environmental), but do not
specify BCTs to change these antecedents (Sniehotta, 2009a). Some theories such as
the Social Cognitive Theory (Bandura, 1989) do suggest techniques for changing
central theoretical constructs, but evidence shows that BCTs other than those
hypothesised to effect change might be more effective (Ashford et al., 2010; Michie
et al., 2008). A recent expert rating exercise to link BCTs to theoretical construct
domains showed that experts agreed in about 75% of the cases whether or not a BCT
would be effective to modify a theoretical construct (Michie et al., 2008). However,
there is considerable uncertainty about how exactly to match BCTs onto theoretical
constructs; more research is needed and the developing taxonomies need to reflect
this ongoing research.
The current CALO-RE taxonomy not only provides a reliable and improved
means of reporting, evaluating and implementing evidence, but also offers the
prospect of further integrating the means and the mechanisms of action. The CALO-
RE taxonomy lays the basis for improving the reliable and systematic application of
evidence and theory for physical activity and healthy eating interventions and the
extension of this approach to other behavioural domains. It allows the possibility
of specific links between BCTs and theoretical constructs, a helpful step for refining
theory on the basis of intervention evaluations. This is a major undertaking that
requires collaborative, systematic work using a comprehensive, parsimonious and
reliable taxonomy of BCTs.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Dr Vera Arau´jo-Soares and Dr Jemma Edmunds for coding in the
universities of Aberdeen and Coventry, respectively, and to Vera Arau´jo-Soares for
contributing the Aberdeen-based taxonomy development represented in this article.
