A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 1 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Tables and Figure for
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods;
an Intervention Mapping Approach
This document contains the Tables and Figure that accompany the publication “A Taxonomy of
Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach” that was accepted for publication (and
published online) in Health Psychology Review in 2015:
Kok, G., Gottlieb, N. H., Peters, G.-J. Y., Mullen, P. D., Parcel, G. S., Ruiter, R. A. C., Fernández, M. E.,
Markham, C., & Bartholomew, L. K. (2015). A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an
Intervention Mapping Approach.
Health Psychology Review. DOI: 10.1080/17437199.2015.1077155
Note that the final citation will likely be different (e.g. the article may be published in 2016 or later), but
the DOI will remain the same.
This document is available as supplemental material accompanying the publication in Health
Psychology Review (http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2015.1077155), and in the Open Science
Framework repository at http://osf.io/sqtuz. Note that introductory material to this publication and
these tables with behavior change methods is available at http://effectivebehaviorchange.com.
If you wish to cite these supplemental materials, instead please cite the original paper to which they
belong (see http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2015.1077155).
This document contains four sections: first, the abstract of the original Health Psychology Review
publication; second, an excerpt from that publication where use of the tables is explained; third, Tables
1-15 and Figure 1 from the publication; and fourth, the references cited in Tables 1-15.
The next page first starts with a Table of Contents.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 2 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table of contents
Abstract 3
How to use the tables 4
Tables and Figure 5
Table 1: Basic Methods at the Individual Level (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011) 5
Table 2: Methods to Increase Knowledge (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011) 7
Table 3: Methods to Change Awareness and Risk Perception (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011) 8
Table 4: Methods to Change Habitual, Automatic and Impulsive Behaviors (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011) 9
Table 5: Methods to Change Attitudes, Beliefs, and Outcome Expectations (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011) 10
Table 6: Methods to Change Social Influence (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011) 11
Table 7: Methods to Change Skills, Capability, and Self-Efficacy and to Overcome Barriers (Adapted from Bartholomew et al.,
2011) 12
Table 8: Methods to Reduce Public Stigma (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011) 14
Table 9: Basic Methods for Change of Environmental Conditions. (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011) 15
Table 10: Methods to Change Social Norms (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011) 16
Table 11: Methods to Change Social Support and Social Networks (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011) 17
Table 12: Methods to Change Organizations (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011) 18
Table 13: Methods to Change Communities (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011) 19
Table 14: Methods to Change Policy (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011) 20
Table 15: Description of determinants, methods and applications; examples from Long Live Love, a school-based sex
education program (Schaalma et al., 2011) 21
Figure 1: Similarity of the processes of change at the individual and environmental levels. 23
References 24
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 3 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the IM taxonomy of behavior change methods and its potential to be
developed into a coding taxonomy. That is, although IM and its taxonomy of behavior change methods
are not in fact new, because IM was originally developed as a tool for intervention development, this
potential was not immediately apparent. Second, in explaining the IM taxonomy and defining the
relevant constructs, we call attention to the existence of parameters for effectiveness of methods, and
explicate the related distinction between theory-based methods and practical applications and the
probability that poor translation of methods may lead to erroneous conclusions as to method-
effectiveness. Third, we recommend a minimal set of intervention characteristics that may be reported
when intervention descriptions and evaluations are published. Specifying these characteristics can
greatly enhance the quality of our meta-analyses and other literature syntheses.
In conclusion, the dynamics of behavior change are such that any taxonomy of methods of behavior
change needs to acknowledge the importance of, and provide instruments for dealing with, three
conditions for effectiveness for behavior change methods. For a behavior change method to be effective:
1) it must target a determinant that predicts behavior; 2) it must be able to change that determinant; 3) it
must be translated into a practical application in a way that preserves the parameters for effectiveness
and fits with the target population, culture, and context. Thus, taxonomies of methods of behavior
change must distinguish the specific determinants that are targeted, practical, specific applications, and
the theory-based methods they embody. In addition, taxonomies should acknowledge that the lists of
behavior change methods will be used by, and should be used by, intervention developers. Ideally, the
taxonomy should be readily usable for this goal; but alternatively, it should be clear how the information
in the taxonomy can be used in practice. The IM taxonomy satisfies these requirements, and it would be
beneficial if other taxonomies would be extended to also meet these needs.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 4 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
The following is an excerpt from the original open access paper in Health Psychology Review
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2015.1077155). If you have not yet read that paper, we strongly recommend
doing so first to provide the necessary background for understanding these tables. Two introductory open access
articles, “A practical guide to effective behavior change: How to identify what to change in the first place” and “A
practical guide to effective behavior change: How to apply theory- and evidence-based behavior change methods in
an intervention” are available at http://effectivebehaviorchange.com, and can also be of help.
How to use the tables
This description assumes that the intervention developer has identified which behavior to change, and
whose behavior this is (i.e., either of a target population individual or of an environmental agent). It also
assumes that the relevant determinants and underlying beliefs have been identified. When selecting
methods for individuals from the target population, for each determinant, Tables 1-8 can be consulted to
get an initial list of methods that can be used to change that determinant. For example, Table 1 contains
methods that can be used for most determinants, whereas Table 3 contains methods to change
awareness and risk perception, and Table 6 contains methods to change perceived social influence. For
each potential method, inspect the definition and the parameters to determine whether the method is
applicable given the situation. Then, use the references included in the Tables to study the relevant
literature, and use bibliographic databases such as Google Scholar to locate more recent literature.
Repeat these steps for all determinants, until methods have been identified to target all determinants
and beliefs. Then, translate these methods into practical applications, making sure that the parameters
for effectiveness are respected. It is important to note that these parameters for effectiveness are subject
to change as new literature is published. Also, the strength of the evidence for each method varies, new
methods can emerge, and evidence can accumulate that certain methods are better avoided (e.g.,
threatening communication in populations low in self-efficacy).
When selecting methods to target environmental agents, the process is similar. Depending on the
environmental level of the agent, consult Tables 9-14 to get an initial list of methods. For example, Table
9 contains basic methods that can be used for agents at all environmental levels, whereas Table 11
contains methods that can be used to target agents at the organizational level. Because each
environmental agent is a person (or several), in addition to these environmental methods, Tables 1-8 can
also be consulted to get a list of methods at the individual level. Of course, at the environmental level, it
is also necessary to consult the literature, both those publications cited in the tables and recent updates.
Nota bene: The theoretical background for all methods is provided in Bartholomew et al. (2011; 2016) and
mentioned in the tables. Use the Bartholomew et al. book to find the essential background information.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 5 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Tables and Figure
Table 1: Basic Methods at the Individual Level (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011)
Method
(related theories and references)
Definition Parameters
Participation (Diffusion of
Innovations Theory; Theories of
Power; Organizational Development
Theories; Models of Community
Organization; Cummings & Worley,
2015; McCullum, Pelletier, Barr,
Wilkins, & Habicht, 2004; Rogers,
2003; World Health Organization
Regional Office for Europe, 2002)
Assuring high level engagement of
the participants’ group in problem
solving, decision making, and
change activities; with highest level
being control by the participants’
group.
Requires willingness by the health
promoter or convener to accept the
participants as having a high level of
influence;
Requires participants’ group to
possess appropriate motivation and
skills.
Belief selection (Theory of Planned
Behavior; Reasoned Action
Approach; Fishbein & Ajzen, 2010)
Using messages designed to
strengthen positive beliefs, weaken
negative beliefs, and introduce new
beliefs.
Requires investigation of the current
attitudinal, normative and efficacy
beliefs of the individual before
choosing the beliefs on which to
intervene.
Persuasive communication
(Communication-Persuasion Matrix;
Elaboration Likelihood Model;
Diffusion of Innovations Theory;
McGuire, 2012; Petty, Barden, &
Wheeler, 2009; Rogers, 2003)
Guiding individuals and
environmental agents toward the
adoption of an idea, attitude, or
action by using arguments or other
means.
Messages need to be relevant and
not too discrepant from the beliefs
of the individual; can be stimulated
by surprise and repetition. Will
include arguments.
Active learning ((Elaboration
Likelihood Model; Social Cognitive
Theory; Kelder, Hoelscher, & Perry,
2015; Petty et al., 2009)
Encouraging learning from goal-
driven and activity-based
experience.
Time, information, and skills.
Tailoring (Trans-Theoretical Model;
Precaution Adoption Process Model;
Protection Motivation Theory;
Communication-Persuasion Matrix;
Lustria, Cortese, Noar, & Glueckauf,
2009; McGuire, 2012; Weinstein,
Sandman, & Blalock, 2008; Werrij,
Ruiter, van `t Riet, & de Vries, 2012)
Matching the intervention or
components to previously measured
characteristics of the participant.
Tailoring variables or factors related
to behavior change (such as stage)
or to relevance (such as culture or
socioeconomic status).
Individualization (L K Bartholomew
et al., 2000; L. K. Bartholomew,
Czyzewski, Swank, McCormick, &
Parcel, 2000; Prochaska, Redding, &
Evers, 2015)
Providing opportunities for learners
to have personal questions
answered or instructions paced
according to their individual
progress.
Personal communication that
responds to a learner’s needs.
Modeling (Social Cognitive Theory;
Theories of Learning; Kazdin, 2008;
Kelder et al., 2015)
Providing an appropriate model
being reinforced for the desired
action.
Attention, remembrance, self-
efficacy and skills, reinforcement of
model; identification with model,
coping model instead of mastery
model.
Feedback (Theories of Learning;
Goal-Setting Theory, Social
Cognitive Theory; Kazdin, 2008;
Kelder et al., 2015; Latham & Locke,
Giving information to individuals
and environmental agents regarding
the extent to which they are
accomplishing learning or
Feedback needs to be individual,
follow the behavior in time, and be
specific.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 6 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
2007) performance, or the extent to which
performance is having an impact.
Reinforcement (Theories of
Learning; Social Cognitive Theory;
Kazdin, 2008; Kelder et al., 2015;
McSweeney & Murphy, 2014)
Providing reinforcement: linking a
behavior to any consequence that
increases the behavior’s rate,
frequency or probability.
Reinforcement need to be tailored to
the individual, group, or
organization, to follow the behavior
in time, and to be seen as a
consequence of the behavior.
Punishment (Theories of Learning;
Kazdin, 2008; McSweeney &
Murphy, 2014)
Providing punishment: linking a
behavior to any consequence that
decreases the behavior’s rate,
frequency or probability.
Punishment need to be tailored to
the individual, group, or
organization, to follow the behavior
in time, and to be seen as a
consequence of the behavior.
Punishment should be avoided
because of negative side effects. If
used, emphasis should be on
positive reinforcement.
Motivational interviewing, MI
(Self-determination theory; Theories
of self-regulation; Miller & Rollnick,
2012; Ng et al., 2012; Ryan & Deci,
2000)
Providing a collaborative, goal-
oriented style of communication
with particular attention to the
language of change; designed to
strengthen personal motivation for
and commitment to a specific goal
by eliciting and exploring the
person’s own reasons for change
within an atmosphere of acceptance
and compassion.
A supportive relationship between
client and professional combined
with the evocation of patient change
talk. Professionals must recognize
that MI involves collaboration not
confrontation, evocation not
education, autonomy rather than
authority, and exploration instead of
explanation.
Facilitation (Social Cognitive Theory;
Bandura, 1986)
Creating an environment that makes
the action easier or reduces barriers
to action.
Requires real changes in the
environment instead of in the
perceptions of the environment.
Requires the identification of
barriers and facilitators and the
power for making the appropriate
changes. Facilitating conditions on
one environmental level are usually
dealt with by intervening on a higher
environmental level.
Nudging (Theories of Automatic,
Impulsive and Habitual Behavior; de
Ridder, 2014; Thaler & Sunstein,
2008)
Simple changes in the presentation
of choice alternatives that make the
desired choice the easy, automatic
or default choice.
Requires autonomy: freedom of
choice, a sense of awareness, and
the healthy choice being default:
easy and attractive.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 7 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table 2: Methods to Increase Knowledge (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011)
Method
(related theories and references)
Definition Parameters
Chunking (Theories of Information
Processing; Gobet et al., 2001; Smith,
2008)
Using stimulus patterns that may be
made up of parts but that one
perceives as a whole.
Labels or acronyms are assigned to
material to aid memory.
Advance organizers (Theories of
Information Processing; Kools, van
de Wiel, Ruiter, Crüts, & Kok, 2006;
Kools, 2011)
Presenting an overview of the
material that enables a learner to
activate relevant schemas so that
new material can be associated.
Schematic representations of the
content or guides to what is to be
learned.
Using imagery (Theories of
Information Processing; Steen, 2007;
Wright, 2011)
Using artifacts that have a similar
appearance to some subject.
Familiar physical or verbal images as
analogies to a less familiar process.
Discussion (Theories of Information
Processing; Petty et al., 2009)
Encouraging consideration of a topic
in open informal debate.
Listening to the learner to ensure
that the correct schemas are
activated.
Elaboration (Petty et al., 2009;
Theories of Information Processing;
Smith, 2008)
Stimulating the learner to add
meaning to the information that is
processed.
Individuals with high motivation and
high cognitive ability; messages that
are personally
relevant, surprising, repeated,
self-pacing, not distracting, easily
understandable, and include direct
instructions; messages that are not
too discrepant and cause
anticipation of interaction.
Providing cues (Theories of
Information Processing; Godden &
Baddeley, 1975)
Assuring that the same cues are
present at the time of learning and
the time of retrieval.
Cues work best when people are
allowed to select and provide their
own cues.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 8 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table 3: Methods to Change Awareness and Risk Perception (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011)
Method
(related theories and references)
Definition Parameters
Consciousness raising (Health Belief
Model; Precaution-Adoption Process
Model; Trans-Theoretical Model;
Prochaska et al., 2015; Skinner, Tiro,
& Champion, 2015; Weinstein et al.,
2008)
Providing information, feedback, or
confrontation about the causes,
consequences, and alternatives for a
problem or a problem behavior.
Can use feedback and confrontation;
however, raising awareness must be
quickly followed by increase in
problem-solving ability and
(collective) self-efficacy.
Personalize risk (Precaution-
Adoption Process Model; Skinner et
al., 2015)
Providing information about
personal costs or risks of action or
inaction with respect to target
behavior.
Present messages as individual and
undeniable, and compare them with
absolute and normative standards.
Scenario-based risk information
(Precaution-Adoption Process
Model; Mevissen, Meertens, Ruiter,
Feenstra, & Schaalma, 2009)
Providing information that may aid
the construction of an image of the
ways in which a future loss or
accident might occur.
Plausible scenario with a cause and
an outcome; imagery. Most effective
when people generate their own
scenario or when multiple scenarios
are provided.
Framing (: Van ’t Riet et al., 2014;
Werrij et al., 2010)
(Protection Motivation Theory; Van
’t Riet et al., 2014; Werrij et al., 2012)
Using gain-framed messages
emphasizing the advantages of
performing the healthy behavior; or
loss-framed messages, emphasizing
the disadvantages of not performing
the healthy behavior.
Requires high self-efficacy
expectations. Gain frames are more
readily accepted and prevent
defensive reactions.
Self-reevaluation (Trans-Theoretical
Model; Prochaska et al., 2015)
Encouraging combining both
cognitive and affective assessments
of one’s self-image with and without
an unhealthy behavior.
Stimulation of both cognitive and
affective appraisal of self-image.
Can use feedback and confrontation;
however, raising awareness must be
quickly followed by increase in
problem-solving ability and self-
efficacy.
Dramatic relief (Trans-Theoretical
Model; Prochaska et al., 2015)
Encouraging emotional experiences,
followed by reduced affect or
anticipated relief if appropriate
action is taken
Preferably should be done in
counseling context so that emotions
can be aroused and subsequently
relieved.
Environmental reevaluation
(Trans-Theoretical Model; Prochaska
et al., 2015)
Encouraging combining the
affective and cognitive assessments
of how the presence or absence of a
personal behavior affects one’s
social environment.
May include awareness about
serving as a role model for others.
Fear arousal (Protection Motivation
Theory; Extended Parallel Process
Model; Peters, Ruiter, & Kok, 2013;
Ruiter, Kessels, Peters, & Kok, 2014)
Arousing negative emotional
reactions in order to promote self-
protective motivation and action.
Requires high self-efficacy
expectations rather than high
outcome expectations alone; is
rarely effective.
Self-affirmation (Self-Affirmation
Theory; Cohen & Sherman, 2014)
Increasing people’s self-image by
having them elaborate on their
relevant values or desirable
characteristics.
Must be tailored to individual self-
image.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 9 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table 4: Methods to Change Habitual, Automatic and Impulsive Behaviors (Adapted from Bartholomew et
al., 2011)
Method
(related theories and references)
Definition Parameters
Deconditioning (Theories of
Learning; Robbins, Schwartz, &
Wasserman, 2001)
Letting people experience a lack of
reinforcement or even negative
outcomes of the undesired behavior.
Slow process, especially when
reinforcement schedule was
intermittent. It may be necessary to
create a continuous lack of positive
reinforcement.
Counterconditioning (Wood & Neal,
2007)
Encouraging the learning of
healthier behaviors that can
substitute for problem behaviors.
Availability of substitute behaviors.
Implementation intentions
(Theories of Goal Directed Behavior;
Theories of Automatic, Impulsive
and Habitual Behavior; Gollwitzer &
Sheeran, 2006; Verplanken & Aarts,
1999)
Prompting making if-then plans that
link situational cues with responses
that are effective in attaining goals
or desired outcomes.
Existing positive intention.
Cue altering (Verplanken & Aarts,
1999; Wood & Neal, 2007)
Teaching people to change a
stimulus that elicits or signals a
behavior.
Existing positive intention.
Stimulus control (Prochaska et al.,
2015; Wood & Neal, 2007)
Encouraging removing cues for
unhealthy habits and adding
prompts for healthier alternatives.
Needs insight in the behavioral
chain leading to the automatic
response.
Planning coping responses
(Attribution Theory and Relapse
Prevention Theory; Theories of Goal
Directed Behavior; Hofmann, Friese,
& Wiers, 2008; Marlatt & Donovan,
2005)
Getting the person to identify
potential barriers and ways to
overcome these.
Identification of high-risk situations
and practice of coping response.
Early commitment (Theories of
Learning; Robbins et al., 2001)
Having people choose a (larger)
delayed reward far in advance.
Making the choice may be forced
but the choice for the delayed
reward needs to be voluntary.
Public commitment (Theories of
Automatic, Impulsive and Habitual
Behavior; Ajzen, Czasch, & Flood,
2009)
Stimulating pledging, promising or
engaging oneself to perform the
healthful behavior, and announcing
that decision to others.
Most effective when publicly
announced; may include
contracting.
Training executive function (Theories
of Automatic, Impulsive and
Habitual Behavior; Diamond, 2013)
Improving the top-down mental
control processes that are used
when going on automatic or relying
on instinct or intuition would be ill-
advised, insufficient, or impossible.
The task has to be challenging and
substantial repetition is required to
sufficiently train the executive
functions.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 10 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table 5: Methods to Change Attitudes, Beliefs, and Outcome Expectations (Adapted from Bartholomew et
al., 2011)
Method
(related theories and references)
Definition Parameters
Classical conditioning (Theories of
Learning; Kazdin, 2008)
Stimulating the learning of an
association between an
unconditioned stimulus (UCS) and a
conditioned stimulus (CS).
Most effective when the time
interval is short and the CS precedes
the UCS.
Self-reevaluation (Trans-Theoretical
Model; Prochaska et al., 2015)
Encouraging combining both
cognitive and affective assessments
of one’s self-image with and without
an unhealthy behavior.
Stimulation of both cognitive and
affective appraisal of self-image.
Can use feedback and confrontation;
however, raising awareness must be
quickly followed by increase in
problem-solving ability and self-
efficacy.
Environmental reevaluation
(Trans-Theoretical Model; Prochaska
et al., 2015)
Encouraging realizing the negative
impact of the unhealthy behavior
and the positive impact of the
healthful behavior.
Stimulation of both cognitive and
affective appraisal to improve
appraisal and empathy skills.
Shifting perspective (Theories of
Stigma and Discrimination; Batson,
Chang, Orr, & Rowland, 2002)
Encouraging taking the perspective
of the other.
Initiation from the perspective of the
learner; needs imaginary
competence.
Arguments (Communication-
Persuasion Matrix; Elaboration
Likelihood Model; McGuire, 2012;
Petty & Wegener, 2010)
Using a set of one or more
meaningful premises and a
conclusion.
For central processing of arguments
they need to be new to the message
receiver.
Direct experience (Theories of
Learning; Maibach & Cotton, 1995)
Encouraging a process whereby
knowledge is created through the
interpretation of experience.
Rewarding outcomes from the
individual’s experience with the
behavior or assurance that the
individual can cope with and
reframe negative outcomes.
Elaboration (Theories of Information
Processing; Elaboration Likelihood
Model; Petty et al., 2009; Smith,
2008)
Stimulating the learner to add
meaning to the information that is
processed.
Individuals with high motivation and
high cognitive ability; messages that
are personally relevant, surprising,
repeated, self-pacing, not
distracting, easily understandable,
and include direct instructions;
messages that are not too
discrepant and cause anticipation of
interaction.
Anticipated regret (Theory of
Planned Behavior; Reasoned Action
Approach; Richard, van der Pligt, &
de Vries, 1995)
Stimulating people to focus on their
feelings after unintended risky
behavior, before any losses actually
materialize.
Stimulation of imagery; assumes a
positive intention to avoid the risky
behavior.
Repeated exposure(Theories of
Learning; Zajonc, 2001)
Making a stimulus repeatedly
accessible to the individual’s
sensory receptors.
Neutrality of original attitude.
Cultural similarity (Communication-
Persuasion Matrix; Kreuter &
McClure, 2004)
Using characteristics of the target
group in source, message, and
channel.
Using surface characteristics of the
target group enhances receptivity.
Using social-cultural characteristics
leads to a more positive reception of
the message.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 11 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table 6: Methods to Change Social Influence (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011)
Method
(related theories and references)
Definition Parameters
Information about others’ approval
(Theory of Planned Behavior;
Reasoned Action Approach; Social
Comparison Theory; Forsyth, 2014;
Mollen, Ruiter, & Kok, 2010)
Providing information about what
others think about the person’s
behavior and whether others will
approve or disapprove of any
proposed behavior change.
Positive expectations are available in
the environment.
Resistance to social pressure (Theory
of Planned Behavior; Reasoned
Action Approach; Evans, Getz, &
Raines, 1992; Evans, 1984)
Stimulating building skills for
resistance to social pressure.
Commitment to earlier intention;
relating intended behavior to values;
psychological inoculation against
pressure.
Shifting focus (Theory of Planned
Behavior; Reasoned Action
Approach; Fishbein & Ajzen, 2010)
Prompting hiding of the unpopular
behavior or shifting attention away
from the behavior.
Preferably shift focus to a new
reason for performing the behavior.
Mobilizing social support (Diffusion
of Innovations Theory; Theories of
Social Networks and Social Support;
Holt-Lunstad & Uchino, 2015;
Valente, 2015)
Prompting communication about
behavior change in order to provide
instrumental and emotional social
support.
Combines caring, trust, openness,
and acceptance with support for
behavioral change; positive support
is available in the environment.
Provide opportunities for
social comparison (Social
Comparison Theory; Suls, Martin, &
Wheeler, 2002)
Facilitating observation of
nonexpert others in order to
evaluate one’s own opinions and
performance abilities.
Upward comparison may help
setting better goals; downward
comparison may help feeling better
or more self-efficacious.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 12 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table 7: Methods to Change Skills, Capability, and Self-Efficacy and to Overcome Barriers (Adapted from
Bartholomew et al., 2011)
Method
(related theories and references)
Definition Parameters
Guided practice (Social Cognitive
Theory; Theories of Self-Regulation;
Kelder et al., 2015)
Prompting individuals to rehearse
and repeat the behavior various
times, discuss the experience, and
provide feedback.
Subskill demonstration, instruction,
and enactment with
Individual feedback; requires
supervision by an experienced
person; some environmental
changes cannot be rehearsed.
Enactive mastery experiences
(Social Cognitive Theory; Theories of
Self-Regulation; Kelder et al., 2015)
Providing increasingly challenging
tasks with feedback to serve as
indicators of capability.
Requires willingness to accept
feedback.
Verbal persuasion (Social Cognitive
Theory; Theories of Self-Regulation;
Kelder et al., 2015)
Using messages that suggest that
the participant possesses certain
capabilities.
Credible source.
Improving physical and emotional
states (Theories of Self-Regulation;
Kelder et al., 2015)
Prompting interpretation of
enhancement or reduction of
physiological and affective states, to
judge own capabilities.
Must carefully interpret and manage
emotional states.
Reattribution training (Attribution
Theory and Relapse Prevention
Theory; Theories of Self-Regulation;
Marlatt & Donovan, 2005)
Helping people reinterpret previous
failures in terms of unstable
attributions and previous successes
in terms of stable attributions.
Requires counseling or bibliotherapy
to make unstable and external
attributions for failure.
Self-monitoring of behavior
(Theories of Self-Regulation; Creer,
2000; Harkin et al., n.d.)
Prompting the person to keep a
record of specified behavior(s).
The monitoring must be of the
specific behavior (that is, not of a
physiological state or health
outcome). The data must be
interpreted and used. The reward
must be reinforcing to the
individual.
Provide contingent rewards (Theories
of Learning; Theories of Self-
Regulation; Bandura, 1986)
Praising, encouraging, or providing
material rewards that are explicitly
linked to the achievement of
specified behaviors.
Rewards need to be tailored to the
individual, group or organization, to
follow the behavior in time, and to
be seen as a consequence of the
behavior.
Cue altering (Theories of Automatic,
Impulsive, and Habitual Behavior;
Theories of Self-Regulation;
Achtziger, Gollwitzer, & Sheeran,
2008)
Teaching changing a stimulus,
either consciously or unconsciously
perceived, that elicits or signals a
behavior.
Existing positive intention.
Public commitment (Theories of
Automatic, Impulsive, and Habitual
Behavior; Ajzen et al., 2009)
Stimulating pledging, promising, or
engaging oneself to perform the
healthful behavior and announcing
that decision to others.
Needs to be a public announcement;
may include contracting.
Goal setting (Goal-Setting Theory;
Theories of Self-Regulation; Latham
& Locke, 2007)
Prompting planning what the person
will do, including a definition of
goal-directed behaviors that result
in the target behavior.
Commitment to the goal; goals that
are difficult but available within the
individual’s skill level.
Set graded tasks (Social Cognitive
Theory; Theories of Self-Regulation;
Kelder et al., 2015)
Setting easy tasks and increase
difficulty until target behavior is
performed.
The final behavior can be reduced to
easier but increasingly difficult sub-
behaviors.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 13 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Planning coping responses
(Attribution Theory and Relapse
Prevention Theory; Theories of Self-
Regulation; Marlatt & Donovan,
2005)
Prompting participants to list
potential barriers and ways to
overcome these.
Identification of high-risk situations
and practice of coping response.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 14 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table 8: Methods to Reduce Public Stigma (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011)
Method
(related theories and references)
Definition Parameters
Stereotype-inconsistent information
(Theories of Stigma and
Discrimination; Bos, Schaalma, &
Pryor, 2008)
Providing positive examples from
the stigmatized group.
Only effective when there are many
different examples.
Examples are not too discrepant
from original stereotype.
Interpersonal contact (Theories of
Stigma and Discrimination;
Pettigrew & Tropp, 2006)
Bringing people in contact with
members of the stigmatized group.
Requires positive experiences. Most
effective when: no status
differences; externally sanctioned;
intensive contact; common or
shared goals.
Empathy training (Theories of
Stigma and Discrimination; Batson
et al., 2002)
Stimulating people to empathize
with another person, i.e., imagine
how the other person would feel.
Requires being able and willing to
identify with the stigmatized person.
Imagine how the other person would
feel (this leads to empathy). Do not
imagine how you would feel (this
leads to both empathy and distress).
Cooperative learning (Theories of
Stigma and Discrimination;
Aronson, 2011)
Engineering lessons in a way that
students must learn from one
another.
Requires careful organization of
lesson information distribution.
Conscious regulation of impulsive
stereotyping and prejudice
(Theories of Stigma and
Discrimination; Bos et al., 2008)
Forcing oneself to control impulsive
negative reactions related to stigma.
Mere suppression almost always
leads to counterproductive effects
and is not advisable. Conscious self-
regulation of automatic stereotyping
can be used effectively.
Reducing inequalities of class, race,
gender and sexuality (Theories of
Stigma and Discrimination; Link &
Phelan, 2001)
See methods for changes at higher
Environmental levels (see Tables 9 -
14).
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 15 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table 9: Basic Methods for Change of Environmental Conditions. (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011)
Method
(related theories and references)
Definition Parameters
Systems change (Systems Theory:
Best et al., 2012; National Cancer
Institute, 2007)
Interacting with the environment to
change the elements and
relationship among elements of a
system at any level, especially
through dialogue with stakeholders,
action, and learning through
feedback.
Methods and actors depend on the
level of the system.
Participatory problem solving
(Organizational Development
Theories; Social Capital Theory;
Models of Community Organization;
Butterfoss, Kegler, & Francisco,
2008; Cummings & Worley, 2015;
Wallerstein, Minkler, Carter-
Edwards, Avila, & Sanchez, 2015)
Diagnosing the problem,
Generating potential solutions,
developing priorities, making an
action plan, and obtaining feedback
after implementing the plan.
Requires willingness by the health
promoter or convener to accept the
participants as equals and as having
a high level of influence; requires
target group to possess appropriate
motivation and skills. Will often
include goal setting, facilitation,
feedback and consciousness raising.
Coercion (Theories of Power;
Freudenberg & Tsui, 2014; Turner,
2005)
Attempting to control others against
their will.
Requires or creates a power
differential.
Advocacy and lobbying (Stage
Theory of Organizational Change;
Models of Community Organization;
Agenda-Building Theory; Multiple
Streams Theory; Christoffel, 2000;
Galer-Unti, Tappe, & Lachenmayr,
2004; Kingdon, 2003; Wallack,
Dorfman, Jernigan, & Themba, 1993;
Weible, Sabatier, & McQueen, 2009)
Arguing and mobilizing resources
on behalf of a particular change;
giving aid to a cause; active support
for a cause or position.
Form of advocacy must match style
and tactics of the people,
communities or organizations
represented, and the nature of the
issue; includes policy advocacy;
often tailored to a specific
environmental agent. Will often
include persuasive communication,
information about others’ approval
and consciousness raising.
Modeling (Social Cognitive Theory;
Organizational Development
Theories; Diffusion of Innovations
Theory; Empowerment Theory;
Bandura, 1997; Kelder et al., 2015;
Rogers, 2003)
Providing an appropriate model
being reinforced for the desired
action.
Appropriate models will vary by
level, including group members and
organizational, community, and
policy change agents.
Technical assistance (Organizational
Development Theories, Diffusion of
Innovations Theory, Social Capital
Theory, Models of Community
Organization; Flaspohler, Duffy,
Wandersman, Stillman, & Maras,
2008; R. E. Mitchell, Florin, &
Stevenson, 2002)
Providing technical means to
achieve desired behavior.
Nature of technical assistance will
vary by environmental level, but
must fit needs, culture, and
resources of the recipient.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 16 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table 10: Methods to Change Social Norms (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011)
Method
(related theories and references)
Definition Parameters
Mass media role-modeling (Bandura,
1997; Rogers, 2003)
Providing appropriate models being
reinforced for the desired action
through the mass media.
Conditions for modeling; conditions
for persuasive communication (see
Table 1).
Entertainment education (Moyer-
Gusé, 2008; Petraglia, 2007; Shen &
Han, 2014; Wilkin et al., 2007)
Providing a form of entertainment
designed to educate (about health
behavior) as well as to entertain.
Consideration of source and
channel; balance of media
professional’s and health promoter’s
needs.
Behavioral journalism (Diffusion of
Innovations Theory; Social Cognitive
Theory; Social norm theories; A. L.
McAlister, 1991; A. McAlister et al.,
2000; Ramirez et al., 2010; Reininger
et al., 2010)
Using by the mass and local media
of appropriate role-model stories of
behavior change based on authentic
interviews with the target group.
Adequate role models from the
community and elicitation
interviews to describe the behavior
and the positive outcome.
Mobilizing social networks (Theories
of Social Networks and Social
Support; Social norm theories;
Valente, 2012)
Encouraging social networks to
provide informational, emotional,
appraisal, and instrumental support.
Availability of social network and
potential support givers. Will often
include information about others’
approval, facilitation and persuasive
communication.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 17 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table 11: Methods to Change Social Support and Social Networks (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011)
Method
(related theories and references)
Definition Parameters
Enhancing network linkages
(Theories of Social Networks and
Social Support; Holt-Lunstad &
Uchino, 2015; Valente, 2015)
Training network members to
provide support and members of the
target group to mobilize and
maintain their networks.
Available network.
Developing new social network
linkages (Theories of Social
Networks and Social Support;
Valente, 2015)
Linking members to new networks
by mentor programs, buddy
systems, and self-help groups.
Willingness of networks to reach
out; availability of networks that can
provide appropriate support and
linkage agents.
Use of lay health workers; peer
education (Theories of Social
Networks and Social Support;
Models of Community Organization;
Tolli, 2012)
Mobilizing members of the target
population to serve as boundary
spanners, credible sources of
information, and role models.
Natural helpers in community with
opinion leader status and availability
to volunteer for training.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 18 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table 12: Methods to Change Organizations (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011)
Method
(related theories and references)
Definition Parameters
Sense-making (Organizational
Development Theory; Weick &
Quinn, 1999)
Leaders reinterpret and relabel
processes in organization, create
meaning through dialogue, and
model and redirect change.
Used for continuous change,
including culture change.
Organizational diagnosis and
feedback (Organizational
Development Theory; Cummings &
Worley, 2015)
Assessing of organizational
structures and employees’ beliefs
and attitudes, desired outcomes and
readiness to take action, using
surveys and other methods.
Methods appropriate to
organizational characteristics, for
example, size and information
technology. Will often include
feedback and consciousness raising.
Team building and human relations
training (Organizational
Development Theory; Cummings &
Worley, 2015)
Grouping development activities
based on the values of human
potential, participation, and
development.
Compatible with the culture.
Structural redesign (Organizational
Development Theory; Cummings &
Worley, 2015; Jones, 2004)
Change organizational elements
such as formal statements of
organizational philosophy,
communication flow, reward
systems, job descriptions, and lines
of authority.
Management authority and
agreement.
Increasing stakeholder influence
(Stakeholder Theory; Brown,
Bammer, Batliwala, & Kunreuther,
2003; Kok, Gurabardhi, Gottlieb, &
Zijlstra, 2015; R. K. Mitchell, Agle, &
Wood, 1997)
Increase stakeholder power,
legitimacy, and urgency, often by
forming coalitions and using
community development and social
action to change an organization’s
policies.
The focal organization perceives that
the external organization or group is
one of its stakeholders.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 19 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table 13: Methods to Change Communities (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011)
Method
(related theories and references)
Definition Parameters
Problem-posing education
(Conscientization Theory;
Empowerment Theory; Freire, 1973a,
1973b; Wallerstein, Sanchez, &
Velarde, 2004)
Participatory analysis using critical
reflection, self-disclosure, and
dialogue regarding the social forces
underlying a problem and a
commitment to change self and
community.
A safe environment for participation
and disclosure; a critical stance.
Community assessment (Models of
Community Organization; Rothman,
2004)
Assessing a community’s assets and
needs, with feedback of results to
the community.
Requires expert assistance and
possibilities for feedback.
Community development (Models of
Community Organization; Theories
of Power; Minkler & Wallerstein,
2012; Rothman, 2004; Wallerstein et
al., 2015)
A form of community organization,
based on consensus, in which power
is shared equally and members
engage together in participatory
problem solving.
Starting where the community is;
may be grassroots or professional
driven. Will often include
consciousness raising, facilitation,
goal setting and information about
others’ approval.
Social action (Theories of Power;
Stakeholder Theory; Kok et al., 2015;
Minkler & Wallerstein, 2012;
Rothman, 2004; Wallerstein et al.,
2015)
A form of community organization,
based in conflict, in which
disenfranchised people wrest power
from the official power.
Starting where the community is;
may be grassroots or professional
driven. Will often include
consciousness raising, persuasive
communication, information about
others’ approval and modeling.
Forming coalitions (Models of
Community Organization; Social
Capital Theory; Butterfoss & Kegler,
2009; Butterfoss, 2007; Clavier & de
Leeuw, 2013)
Forming an alliance among
individuals or organizations, during
which they cooperate in joint action
to reach a goal in their own self-
interest.
Requires collaboration across
various agendas; requires attention
to stages of partnership
development. Will often include
persuasive communication,
consciousness raising, goal setting,
facilitation and information about
others’ approval.
Social planning (Models of
Community Organization; Rothman,
2004)
Using information based on
research to address issues.
Requires credible source of the
information.
Framing to shift perspectives
(Models of Community
Organization; Snow, 2004)
Assigning meaning and
interpretation to relevant events and
conditions in order to mobilize
potential constituents, gain
bystander support, and demobilize
antagonists.
Match with culture.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 20 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table 14: Methods to Change Policy (Adapted from Bartholomew et al., 2011)
Method
(related theories and references)
Definition Parameters
Media advocacy (Models of
Community Organization; Dorfman
& Krasnow, 2014; Wallack et al.,
1993; Wallack, 2008)
Expose environmental agents’
behaviors in the mass media to
order to get them to improve health-
related conditions. A type of
advocacy.
Requires the media to approve the
news value of the message and
accept the message without
changing its essential content.
Agenda setting (Multiple Streams
Theory, Advocacy Coalition Theory,
Theories of Power; Clavier & de
Leeuw, 2013; Sabatier, 2003; Weible
et al., 2009; Weible, 2008)
Process of moving an issue to the
political agenda for action; may
make use of broad policy advocacy
coalitions and media advocacy.
Requires appropriate timing (see
policy window) and collaboration of
(media) gatekeepers. Will often
include persuasive communication
and consciousness raising.
Timing to coincide with policy
windows (Multiple Streams Theory;
Kingdon, 2003; Zahariadis, 2007)
Advocating policy when politics,
problems and policy solutions are
aligned to be receptive to a policy
issue.
Requires an astute policy advocate
who is well prepared
Creating and enforcing laws and
regulations (Multiple Streams
Theory, Theories of Power; Clavier &
de Leeuw, 2013; Kingdon, 2003;
Longest, 2006)
Forcing compliance or dictating or
precluding choices. Sometimes
Implementing existing laws to
Accomplish change. Laws and
regulations may also provide
incentives.
Requires unequal power and
availability of control and sanctions.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 21 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Table 15: Description of determinants, methods and applications; examples from Long Live Love, a school-based sex education program (Schaalma et al.,
2011)
Determinants & Change objectives
for Adolescents
Methods Parameters Applications How population, context and parameters were taken
into account
Risk perception:
Recognize that they might
land in situations in which
contracting HIV and STIs
can’t be ruled out
Scenario-
based risk
information
Plausible scenario with a
cause and an outcome;
imagery. Most effective
when people generate
their own scenario or
when multiple scenarios
are provided.
Role-model stories in textbooks;
videotaped role modeling, where
the videos were discussed in class
Population: adolescent models are used
Context: videos can be shown in class and discussed
Parameters: plausible scenario with a cause and an
outcome; multiple scenarios; models are peers that
are reinforced for the right behavior
Attitude:
Describe their strong
perception of the advantages
of condom use and other
safe-sex options
Active
learning
Time, information, and
skills.
Inquiry teaching; group
discussion; quiz; interviews
Population: experts indicated that adolescents are
familiar with and like a quiz setting
Context: teacher available for guidance and
facilitation of the discussion and inquiry teaching
Parameters: sufficient time and information;
professional guidance
Recognize that advantages of
safe sex outweigh
disadvantages
Anticipated
regret
Stimulation of imagery;
assumes a positive
intention to avoid the
risky behavior.
Role-model stories; videotaped
role modeling
Population: scenarios were selected that were
realistic given situations that were common for the
target population
Context: videos can be shown in class and discussed
Parameters: realistic scenarios, positive risk
avoidance intention; models are peers that are
reinforced for the right behavior
Social influences:
Explain that peers plan to use
condoms
Information
about
others’
approval
Positive expectations
available in social
environment
Role-model stories; videotaped
role modeling; group discussion
Population: adolescents are particularly sensitive to
social influence from peers, so peers’ approval was
communicated
Context: by showing the videos in class, real life
norms are also activated
Parameters: peer norms are positive
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 22 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Skills & Self-efficacy:
Express confidence in ability
to buy condoms
Demonstrate effective
condom use
Modeling Attention, remembrance,
self-efficacy and skills,
reinforcement;
identification, coping
model.
Role-model stories; videotaped
role modeling
Population: target population did not easily discuss
openly buying and using condoms. Therefore,
starting from a video that was watched together
provided a relatively safe starting point.
Context: Watching the video in class together
provides a shared experience that facilitates frank
discussion.
Parameters: models are peers that are reinforced for
the right behavior; application is combined with
skills and self-efficacy training
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 23 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Figure 1: Similarity of the processes of change at the individual and environmental levels.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 24 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
References
Achtziger, A., Gollwitzer, P. M., & Sheeran, P. (2008). Implementation intentions and shielding
goal striving from unwanted thoughts and feelings.
Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin,
34, 381–393. doi:10.1177/0146167207311201
Ajzen, I., Czasch, C., & Flood, M. G. (2009). From Intentions to Implementation:
Implementation Intention, Commitment, and Conscientiousness.
Journal of Applied
Social Psychology,
39(6), 1356–1372.
Aronson, E. (2011).
The Social Animal (11th ed.). New York: MacMillan Education.
Bandura, A. (1986).
Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Upper
Saddle River, NJ, US: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Bandura, A. (1997).
Self-efficacy: the exercise of control. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Bartholomew, L. K., Czyzewski, D. I., Swank, P. R., McCormick, L., & Parcel, G. S. (2000).
Maximizing the impact of the cystic fibrosis family education program: Factors related
to program diffusion.
Family & Community Health,
22, 27–47.
Bartholomew, L. K., Gold, R. S., Parcel, G. S., Czyzewski, D. I., Sockrider, M. M., Fernandez, M.,
… Berlin, N. (2000). Watch, Discover, Think, and Act: Evaluation of computer-assisted
instruction to improve asthma self-management in inner-city children.
Patient
Education and Counseling,
39(2-3), 269–280.
Bartholomew, L. K., Parcel, G. S., Kok, G., Gottlieb, N. H., & Fernández, M. E. (2011). Planning
health promotion programs: an Intervention Mapping approach (3rd ed.). San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bartholomew, L. K., Markham, C. M., Ruiter, R. A. C., Fernàndez, M. E., Kok, G., & Parcel, G. S.
(2016). Planning Health Promotion Programs: An Intervention Mapping Approach (4th
ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Batson, C. D., Chang, J., Orr, R., & Rowland, J. (2002). Empathy, Attitudes, and Action: Can
Feeling for a Member of a Stigmatized Group Motivate One to Help the Group?
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. doi:10.1177/014616702237647
Best, A., Greenhalgh, T., Lewis, S., Saul, J. E., Carroll, S., & Bitz, J. (2012). Large-Scale
Transformation in Health Care: A Realist View.
The Milbank Quarterly,
90(3), 421–456.
Bos, A. E. R., Schaalma, H. P., & Pryor, J. B. (2008). Reducing AIDS-related stigma in
developing countries: the importance of theory- and evidence-based interventions.
Psychology, Health & Medicine,
13(4), 450–460. doi:10.1080/13548500701687171
Brown, L. D., Bammer, G., Batliwala, S., & Kunreuther, F. (2003). Framing Practice-Research
Engagement for Democratizing Knowledge.
Action Research,
1(1), 81–102.
doi:10.1177/14767503030011006
Butterfoss, F. D. (2007).
Coalitions and partnerships in community health. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Butterfoss, F. D., & Kegler, M. C. (2009). The community coalition action theory. In R. J.
DiClemente, R. A. Crosby, & M. C. Kegler (Eds.),
Emerging theories in health promotion
practice and research (pp. 237–276). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Butterfoss, F. D., Kegler, M. C., & Francisco, V. T. (2008). Mobilizing organizations for health
promotion: Theories of organizational change. In K. Glanz, B. K. Rimer, & K. Viswanath
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 25 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
(Eds.),
Health behavior and health education: Theory, research, and practice (pp. 335–
362). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Christoffel, K. K. (2000). Public health advocacy: Process and product.
American Journal of
Public Health,
90(5), 722–726. doi:10.2105/AJPH.90.5.722
Clavier, C., & de Leeuw, E. (2013).
Health Promotion and the Policy Process. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). The psychology of change: self-affirmation and social
psychological intervention.
Annual Review of Psychology,
65, 333–71.
doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115137
Creer, T. L. (2000). Self-management of chronic illness. In M. Boekaerts, P. R. Pintrich, & M.
Zeidner (Eds.),
Handbook of self-regulation (pp. 601–629). San Diego, CA, US: Academic
Press.
Cummings, T. G., & Worley, C. G. (2015).
Organization development and change (10th ed.).
Mason, OH, US: South-Western Cengage Learning.
De Ridder, D. (2014). Nudging for Beginners.
The European Health Psychologist,
16(1), 2–6.
Diamond, A. (2013). Executive functions.
Annual Review of Psychology,
64, 135–68.
doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-113011-143750
Dorfman, L., & Krasnow, I. D. (2014). Public health and media advocacy.
Annual Review of
Public Health,
35, 293–306. doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-032013-182503
Evans, R. I. (1984). A social inoculation strategy to deter smoking in adolescents. In J. D.
Matarazzi, S. M. Weiss, J. A. Herd, N. E. Miller, & S. M. Weiss (Eds.),
Behavioral Health: A
Handbook of Health Enhancement and Disease Prevention (pp. 765-774). New York:
John Wiley & Sons.
Evans, R. I., Getz, J. G., & Raines, B. S. (1992). Applying social inoculation concepts to
prevention of HIV/AIDS in adolescents: Just say no is obviously not enough. In
the
meeting of the Society of Behavioral Medicine. New York.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (2010).
Predicting and changing behavior: The reasoned action
approach. New York: Psychology Press.
Flaspohler, P., Duffy, J., Wandersman, A., Stillman, L., & Maras, M. A. (2008). Unpacking
prevention capacity: An intersection of research-to-practice models and community-
centered models.
American Journal of Community Psychology,
41(3-4), 182–196.
doi:10.1007/s10464-008-9162-3
Forsyth, D. R. (2014).
Group dynamics (6th ed.). Belmont, CA, US: Thomson Higher Education.
Freire, P. (1973a).
Education for critical consciousness. New York: Seabury Press.
Freire, P. (1973b).
Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Seabury Press.
Freudenberg, N., & Tsui, E. (2014). Evidence, power, and policy change in community-based
participatory research.
American Journal of Public Health,
104(1), 11–14.
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2013.301471
Galer-Unti, R. A., Tappe, M. K., & Lachenmayr, S. (2004). Advocacy 101: getting started in
health education advocacy.
Health Promotion Practice,
5(3), 280–288.
doi:10.1177/1524839903257697
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 26 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Gobet, F., Lane, P. C. R., Croker, S., Cheng, P. C.-H., Jones, G., Oliver, I., & Pine, J. M. (2001).
Chunking mechanisms in human learning.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
6613(June),
236–243. doi:10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01662-4
Godden, D. R., & Baddeley, A. D. (1975). Context-dependent Memory in Two Natural
Environments: On Land and Underwater.
British Journal of Psychology,
66(3), 325–331.
doi:10.1111/j.2044-8295.1975.tb01468.x
Gollwitzer, P. M., & Sheeran, P. (2006). Implementation Intentions and Goal Achievement: A
Meta-analysis of Effects and Processes.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,
38(06), 69–119. doi:10.1016/S0065-2601(06)38002-1
Harkin, B., Webb, T., Chang, B., Prestwich, A., Conner, M., Kellar, I., … Sheeran, P. (n.d.). Does
Monitoring Goal Progress Promote Goal Attainment? A Meta-Analysis of the
Experimental Evidence.
Psychological Bulletin, Accepted for publication.
Hofmann, W., Friese, M., & Wiers, R. W. (2008). Impulsive versus reflective influences on
health behavior: a theoretical framework and empirical review.
Health Psychology
Review. doi:10.1080/17437190802617668
Holt-Lunstad, J., & Uchino, B. (2015). Social Support and Health. In K. Glanz, B. K. Rimer, & K.
Viswanath (Eds.),
Health Behavior: Theory, Research and Practice (pp. 183-204). San
Francisco, CA, US: Jossey-Bass.
Jones, G. R. (2004).
Organizational theory, design, and change. Upper Saddle River, NJ, US:
Pearson/Prentice-Hall.
Kazdin, A. E. (2008).
Behavior modification in applied settings (6th ed.). Long Grove, IL, US:
Waveland Press.
Kelder, S., Hoelscher, D., & Perry, C. L. (2015). How individuals, environments and health
behaviors interact: Social Cognitive Theory. In K. Glanz, B. K. Rimer, & K. Viswanath
(Eds.),
Health behavior: Theory, research, and practice (5th ed., pp. 159-182). San
Francisco, CA, US: John Wiley & Sons.
Kingdon, J. W. (2003).
Agendas, alternatives, and public policies (2nd ed.). New York:
Longman.
Kok, G., Gurabardhi, Z., Gottlieb, N. H., & Zijlstra, F. R. H. (2015). Influencing Organizations to
Promote Health : Applying Stakeholder Theory. doi:10.1177/1090198115571363
Kools, M. (2011). Making written materials easy to use. In C. Abraham & M. Kools (Eds.),
Writing health communication: An evidence-based guide (pp. 43-62). London: Sage
Publications.
Kools, M., van de Wiel, M. W. J., Ruiter, R. A. C., Crüts, A., & Kok, G. (2006). The effect of
graphic organizers on subjective and objective comprehension of a health education
text.
Health Education & Behavior,
33(6), 760–772. doi:10.1177/1090198106288950
Kreuter, M. W., & McClure, S. M. (2004). The role of culture in health communication.
Annual
Review of Public Health,
25, 439–455. doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.25.101802.123000
Latham, G. P., & Locke, E. A. (2007). New developments in and directions for goal-setting
research.
European Psychologist,
12(4), 290–300. doi:10.1027/1016-9040.12.4.290
Link, B. G., & Phelan, J. C. (2001). Conceptualizing Stigma.
Annual Review of Sociology.
doi:10.1146/annurev.soc.27.1.363
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 27 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Longest, B. B. (2006).
Health policymaking in the United States (4th ed.). Chicago: Health
Administration Press.
Lustria, M. L. A., Cortese, J., Noar, S. M., & Glueckauf, R. L. (2009). Computer-tailored health
interventions delivered over the web: Review and analysis of key components.
Patient
Education and Counseling. doi:10.1016/j.pec.2008.08.023
Maibach, E. W., & Cotton, D. (1995). Moving people to behavior change: a staged social
cognitive approach to message design. In E.W. Meibach & R.L. Parrot (Eds.),
Designing
Health Messages. Approaches from communication theory and public health practice
(pp. pp. 41–64). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Marlatt, G. A., & Donovan, D. M. (Eds.). (2005).
Relapse prevention; maintenance strategies in
the treatment of addictive behaviors (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
McAlister, A., Johnson, W., Guenther-Grey, C., Fishbein, M., Higgins, D., & O’Reilly, K. (2000).
Behavioral Journalism for HIV Prevention: Community Newsletters Influence Risk-
Related Attitudes and Behavior.
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly.
doi:10.1177/107769900007700111
McAlister, A. L. (1991). Population behavior change: a theory-based approach.
Journal of
Public Health Policy,
12(3), 345–361. doi:10.2307/3342846
McCullum, C., Pelletier, D., Barr, D., Wilkins, J., & Habicht, J.-P. (2004). Mechanisms of Power
Within a Community- Based Food Security Planning Process.
Health Education &
Behavior,
31(2), 206–222. doi:10.1177/1090198103259163
McGuire, W. J. (2012). McGuire’s classic Input-Output Framework for constructing persuasive
messages. In R.E. Rice & C.K. Atkin (Eds.),
Public communication campaigns (4th ed.,
pp. 133–146). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
McSweeney, F. K., & Murphy, E. S. (2014).
The Wiley Blackwell Handbook of Operant and
Classical Conditioning. Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons.
Mevissen, F. E. F., Meertens, R. M., Ruiter, R. A. C., Feenstra, H., & Schaalma, H. P. (2009).
HIV/STI risk communication: the effects of scenario-based risk information and
frequency-based risk information on perceived susceptibility to chlamydia and HIV.
Journal of Health Psychology,
14(1), 78–87. doi:10.1177/1359105308097948
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2012).
Motivational Interviewing. New York: Guilford Press.
Minkler, M., & Wallerstein, N. (2012). Improving health through community organization and
community building: Perspectives from health education and social work. In M. Minkler
(Ed.),
Community organizing and community building for health and welfare (3rd ed.,
pp. 37–58). New Brunswick, NJ, US: Rutgers University Press.
Mitchell, R. E., Florin, P., & Stevenson, J. F. (2002). Supporting community-based prevention
and health promotion initiatives: developing effective technical assistance systems.
Health Education & Behaviorehavior,
29(5), 620–639. doi:10.1177/109019802237029
Mitchell, R. K., Agle, B. R., & Wood, D. J. (1997). Toward a theory of stakeholder identification
and salience: Defining the principle of who and what really counts.
Academy of
Management Review,
22(4), 853–886. doi:10.5465/AMR.1997.9711022105
Mollen, S., Ruiter, R. A. C., & Kok, G. (2010). Current issues and new directions in Psychology
and Health: What are the oughts? The adverse effects of using social norms in health
communication.
Psychology & Health,
25(3), 265–70. doi:10.1080/08870440903262812
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 28 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Moyer-Gusé, E. (2008). Toward a Theory of Entertainment Persuasion: Explaining the
Persuasive Effects of Entertainment-Education Messages.
Communication Theory,
18(3), 407–425. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2885.2008.00328.x
National Cancer Institute. (2007).
Greater than the sum: Systems thinking in tobacco control
(Publication No. 06–6085, Tobacco Control Monograph No. 18). Bethesda, MD.
Ng, J. Y. Y., Ntoumanis, N., Thogersen-Ntoumani, C., Deci, E. L., Ryan, R. M., Duda, J. L., &
Williams, G. C. (2012). Self-Determination Theory Applied to Health Contexts: A Meta-
Analysis.
Perspectives on Psychological Science,
7(4), 325–340. Retrieved from
http://cat.inist.fr/?aModele=afficheN&cpsidt=26177089
Peters, G.-J. Y., Ruiter, R. a C., & Kok, G. (2013). Threatening communication: a critical re-
analysis and a revised meta-analytic test of fear appeal theory.
Health Psychology
Review,
7(Suppl 1), S8–S31. doi:10.1080/17437199.2012.703527
Petraglia, J. (2007). Narrative intervention in behavior and public health.
Journal of Health
Communication,
12(5), 493–505. doi:10.1080/10810730701441371
Pettigrew, T. F., & Tropp, L. R. (2006). A meta-analytic test of intergroup contact theory.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
90(5), 751–783. doi:10.1037/0022-
3514.90.5.751
Petty, R. E., Barden, J., & Wheeler, S. C. (2009). The Elaboration Likelihood Model of
Persuasion: Developing Health promotions for Sustained Behavioral Change. In R. J.
DiClemente, R. A. Crosby, & M. Kegler (Eds.),
Emerging theories in health promotion
practice and research (2nd ed., pp. 185–214). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Petty, R. E., & Wegener, D. T. (2010). Attitude change: Multiple roles for persuasion variables.
In R.F. Baumeister & E.J. Finkel (Eds.)
Advanced social psychology: The state of the
science (pp. 217–259). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Prochaska, J. O., Redding, C. A., & Evers, K. E. (2015). The Transtheoretical Model and stages
of change. In K. Glanz, B. K. Rimer, & K. Viswanath (Eds.),
Health behavior: Theory,
research, and practice (pp. 125-148). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Ramirez, a G., Villarreal, R., McAlister, a, Gallion, K. J., Suarez, L., & Gomez, P. (2010).
Advancing the role of participatory communication in the diffusion of cancer screening
among Hispanics.
Journal of Health Communication,
4(1), 31–36.
doi:10.1080/108107399127075
Reininger, B. M., Barroso, C. S., Mitchell-Bennett, L., Cantu, E., Fernandez, M. E., Gonzalez, D.
A., … McAlister, A. (2010). Process evaluation and participatory methods in an obesity-
prevention media campaign for Mexican Americans.
Health Promotion Practice,
11(3),
347–357. doi:10.1177/1524839908321486
Richard, R., van der Pligt, J., & de Vries, N. (1995). Anticipated affective reactions and
prevention of AIDS.
The British Journal of Social Psychology / the British Psychological
Society,
34 ( Pt 1), 9–21. doi:10.1111/j.2044-8309.1995.tb01045.x
Robbins, S. J., Schwartz, B., & Wasserman, E. A. (2001).
Psychology of learning and behavior.
New York: Norton.
Rogers, E. M. (2003).
Diffusion of innovations. New York: Free Press.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 29 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Rothman, J. (2004). Three models of community organisation practice, their mixing and
phasing. In F. M. Cox, J. L. Erlich, J. Rothman, & J. E. Tropman (Eds.),
Strategies of
community organisation: a book of readings (pp. 25-44). Itasca, IL, US: F. E. Peacock.
Ruiter, R. A. C., Kessels, L. T. E., Peters, G.-J. Y., & Kok, G. (2014). Sixty years of fear appeal
research: Current state of the evidence.
International Journal of Psychology,
49(2), 63–
70.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic
motivation, social development, and well-being.
The American Psychologist,
55(1), 68–
78. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.68
Sabatier, P. A. (2003). Policy change over a decade or more. In P. R. Lee, C. L. Estes, & F. M.
Rodriguez (Eds.),
The nation’s health (pp. 143–174). Sudbury, MA, US: Jones and Bartlett.
Shen, F., & Han, J. (Ashley). (2014). Effectiveness of entertainment education in
communicating health information: a systematic review.
Asian Journal of
Communication, (July), 1–12. doi:10.1080/01292986.2014.927895
Skinner, C. S., Tiro, J., & Champion, V. L. (2015). The Health Belief Model. In K. Glanz, B. Rimer
& K. Viswanath (Eds.),
Health behavior: Theory, research, and practice (5th ed., pp. 131–
167). San Francisco, CA, US: Jossey-Bass.
Smith, R. M. (2008).
Conquering the content: A step-by-step guide to web-based course
development. San Francisco, CA, US: Jossey-Bass.
Snow, D. A. (2004). Framing processes, ideology, and discursive fields. In D. A. Snow, S. A.
Soule, & H. Kriesi (Eds.),
Blackwell companion to social movements (pp. 380–412).
Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Steen, R. G. (2007).
The evolving brain: The known and the unknown. Amherst, NY, US:
Prometheus Books.
Suls, J., Martin, R., & Wheeler, L. (2002). Social Comparison: Why, With Whom, and With What
Effect?
Current Directions in Psychological Science. doi:10.1111/1467-8721.00191
Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008).
Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and
happiness. New Haven, CT, US: Yale University Press.
Tolli, M. V. (2012). Effectiveness of peer education interventions for HIV prevention,
adolescent pregnancy prevention and sexual health promotion for young people: A
systematic review of European studies.
Health Education Research,
27(5), 904–913.
doi:10.1093/her/cys055
Turner, J. C. (2005). Explaining the nature of power: A three-process theory.
European Journal
of Social Psychology. doi:10.1002/ejsp.244
Valente, T. (2012). Network Interventions.
Science,
337(6090), 49–53.
doi:10.1126/science.1217330
Valente, T. (2015). Social networks and health behavior. In K. Glanz, B. K. Rimer, & K.
Viswanath (Eds.),
Health Behavior: Theory, Research and Practice (5th ed., pp. 204-222).
San Francisco: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Van ’t Riet, J., Cox, A. D., Cox, D., Zimet, G. D., De Bruijn, G.-J., Van den Putte, B., … Ruiter, R. a
C. (2014). Does perceived risk influence the effects of message framing? A new
investigation of a widely held notion.
Psychology & Health, (March), 37–41.
doi:10.1080/08870446.2014.896916
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 30 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Verplanken, B., & Aarts, H. (1999). Habit, Attitude, and Planned Behaviour: Is Habit an Empty
Construct or an Interesting Case of Goal-directed Automaticity?
European Review of
Social Psychology,
10(781062661), 101–134. doi:10.1080/14792779943000035
Wallack, L. (2008). Media Advocacy: A strategy for empowering people and communities. In
M. Minkler (Ed.),
Community Organizing and Community Building for Health (pp. 419–
432). New Brunswick, NJ, US: Rutgers University Press.
Wallack, L., Dorfman, L., Jernigan, D., & Themba, M. (1993).
Media advocacy and public
health: Power for prevention. Thousand Oaks, CA, US: Sage Publications.
Wallerstein, N., Minkler, M., Carter-Edwards, L., Avila, M., & Sanchez, V. (2015). Improving
health through community engagement, community organization, and community
building. In K. Glanz, B. K. Rimer, & K. Viswanath (Eds.),
Health behavior: Theory,
research, and practice (5th ed., pp. 277-300). San Francisco, CA, US: Jossey-Bass.
Wallerstein, N., Sanchez, V., & Velarde, L. (2004). Freirian praxis in health education and
community organizing: A case study of an adolescent prevention program. In M.
Minkler (Ed.),
Community organizing and community building for health (2nd ed., pp.
218–236). Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Weible, C. M. (2008). Expert-based information and policy subsystems: A review and
synthesis.
Policy Studies Journal, 36(4), 615-635.
Weible, C. M., Sabatier, P. A., & McQueen, K. (2009). Themes and variations: Taking stock of
the advocacy coalition framework.
Policy Studies Journal,
37(1), 121–140.
Weick, K. E., & Quinn, R. E. (1999). Organizational change and development.
Annual Review
of Psychology,
50, 361–86. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.50.1.361
Weinstein, N. D., Sandman, P. M., & Blalock, S. J. (2008). The Precaution Adoption Process
Model. In K. Glanz, B. K. Rimer, & K. Viswanath (Eds.),
Health behavior and health
education: Theory, research, and practice (4th ed., pp. 123–165). San Francisco, CA, US:
Jossey-Bass.
Werrij, M. Q., Ruiter, R. A. C., van `t Riet, J., & de Vries, H. (2012). Message Framing. In C.
Abraham & M. Kools (Eds.),
Writing health communication: An evidence-based guide
(pp. 123–143). London: Sage Publications.
Wilkin, H. a, Valente, T. W., Murphy, S., Cody, M. J., Huang, G., & Beck, V. (2007). Does
entertainment-education work with Latinos in the United States? Identification and the
effects of a telenovela breast cancer storyline.
Journal of Health Communication,
12(5),
455–469. doi:10.1080/10810730701438690
Wood, W., & Neal, D. T. (2007). A new look at habits and the habit-goal interface.
Psychological Review,
114(4), 843–863. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.114.4.843
World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe. (2002).
Community participation in
local health and sustainable development: Approaches and techniques. Kopenhagen.
Retrieved from http://euro.who.int/document/e78652.pdf
Wright, P. (2011). Using graphics effectively in text. In C. Abraham & M. Kools (Eds.),
Writing
health communication: An evidence-based guide (pp. 63-82). London: Sage
Publications.
Zahariadis, N. (2007). The Multiple Streams Framework. In P.A. Sabatier (Ed.),
Theories of the
Policy Process (pp. 65–92). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods; an Intervention Mapping Approach
Supplemental materials, page 31 of 31 (full version available through http://effectivebehaviorchange.eu)
[v1.2, 2015-10-27]
Zajonc, R. B. (2001). Mere Exposure: A Gateway to the Subliminal.
Current Directions in
Psychological Science. doi:10.1111/1467-8721.00154