Intervention Taxonomy (ITAX): Describing Essential Features of
Interventions (HMC)
Richard Schulz, PhD,
Professor of Department of Psychiatry and Director of University Center for Social and Urban
Research, University of Pittsburgh, 121 University Place, 6th Floor, Pittsburgh, PA 15260. Tele:
412-624-5442. Fax: 412-624-4810. schulz@pitt.edu
Sara J. Czaja, PhD,
Professor of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences and Co-Director of Center on Aging, University of
Miami, 1695 NW 9th Avenue, Suite 3208G, Miami, FL 33136. Tele: 305-355-9068. Fax:
305-355-9076. sczaja@med.miami.edu
James R. McKay, PhD,
Professor of Psychiatry, Treatment Research Center, University of Pennsylvania, 3900 Chestnut
Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104. Tele: 215-746-7704. Fax: 215-746-7733.
mckay_j@mail.trc.upenn.edu
Marcia G Ory, PhD, MPH, and
Professor of Social and Behavioral Health and Director of Active Life National Program Office,
School of Rural Public Health, The Texas A & M University System, 1103 University Drive, Suite100,
College Station, TX 77840. Tele: 979-845-1620. Fax: 979-845-1620. mory@srph.tamu.edu
Steven H Belle, PhD
Professor of Epidemiology and Co-Director of Epidemiology Data Center, Graduate School of Public
Health, University of Pittsburgh, 504 Parran Hall, Pittsburgh, PA 15261. Tele: 412-624-3758. Fax:
412-624-3120. belle@edc.pitt.edu
Abstract
Objectives—To identify key features of interventions that need to be considered in the design,
execution, and reporting of interventions.
Methods—Based on prior work on decomposing psychosocial and clinical interventions, current
guidelines for describing interventions, and a review of a broad range of intervention studies, we
developed a comprehensive intervention taxonomy.
Results—Specific recommendations, rationales, and definitions of intervention delivery and
content characteristics including mode, materials, location, schedule, scripting, and sensitivity to
participant characteristics, interventionist characteristics, adaptability, implementation, content
strategies, and mechanisms of action are provided.
Conclusions—Applying this taxonomy will advance intervention science by (a) improving
intervention designs, (b) enhancing replication and follow-up of intervention studies, (c) facilitating
systematic exploration of the efficacy and effectiveness of intervention components through cross-
study analysis, and (d) informing decisions about the feasibility of implementation in broader
community settings.
Correspondence to: Richard Schulz.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Am J Health Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
Published in final edited form as:
Am J Health Behav. 2010 ; 34(6): 811–821.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Keywords
randomized trials; intervention taxonomy; intervention delivery; intervention content
Introduction
The scientific community has long endorsed transparency in the conduct of research, insisting
on clear rationales for why a study was conducted, concise descriptions of how a study was
carried out and how the data were analyzed. Published guidelines and checklists have been
developed for both randomized and nonrandomized intervention studies to improve the quality
of what is reported so that readers can accurately assess the strength of evidence supporting a
particular conclusion of an intervention study.1–4 These guidelines, which have been endorsed
by many of the major journals that report intervention studies, cover a broad range of design
components and implementation processes. For example, Consolidated Standards of Reporting
Trials (CONSORT) recommend that researchers provide “precise details of the intervention
intended for each group and how and when they were actually administered” (p. 1989).1 These
recommendations were subsequently elaborated to include information on what was given
(content), how it was given (delivery), where the intervention was delivered (setting), and how
much was given (dose).4 Although useful, these guidelines have gaps that limit the ability of
researchers to faithfully replicate studies, and they omit completely some aspects of
interventions that may be important to understanding links between treatment and outcomes
such as cultural sensitivity, adaptability, and strategies for treatment implementation.
In this paper we present a taxonomy for describing intervention protocols that expands existing
guidelines and standards. This taxonomy is designed to help researchers conceptualize needed
elements of intervention protocols and to enhance both the internal (eg, understanding the
active ingredients of intervention components) and external validity (eg, replicating studies in
real world settings) of intervention research.5,6 An expanded taxonomy for more fully
describing interventions is needed to assure accurate replication and extension of published
research and facilitate the translation of controlled efficacy studies into real-world applications
to diverse populations and settings.5 Providing standardized and detailed descriptions of
interventions also expands opportunities for theory testing by enabling researchers to assess
the effects of intervention attributes across studies and in different target populations.
Ultimately this will facilitate the development of evidence-based guidelines for intervention
designers and decrease the risk and inefficiencies of ineffective interventions being adopted.
METHODS
Our interest in developing a taxonomy for characterizing interventions grew out of experience
with the Resources for Enhancing Alzheimer’s Caregiver Health (REACH) I,7–10 a series of
multicomponent randomized trials aimed at enhancing the health and well-being of family
caregivers of persons with Alzheimer’s disease. The basic challenge was to develop a common
language that could characterize the several complex, diverse interventions that were being
tested across the 6 REACH sites. We sought a strategy that would take full advantage of the
diversity and complexity of the various treatment strategies while allowing us to examine
relationships between outcomes and intervention components. Initially, we decomposed the
REACH I interventions using task analysis.9 This analysis revealed that interventions could
be described according to 3 dimensions: (a) entity, or entities, targeted by the intervention,
which included the caregiver, the care recipient, and the social or physical environment; (b)
functional domains targeted by the intervention, which included knowledge, cognitive skills,
behavior, and affect; and (c) delivery system characteristics including method of delivery,
frequency, duration, and ability to adapt the treatment to the needs of the caregiver.9 Using
Schulz et al. Page 2
Am J Health Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
this taxonomy, each of 12 different multicomponent interventions was characterized using a
common language that enabled us to assess relationships between outcomes and intervention
components.10 This approach identified caregiver behavioral-skills training as critical to
achieving reductions in caregiver depression,10 a finding not revealed in the individual study-
level meta-analyses.8 This finding led to the development of a new intervention that was found
to be highly successful in improving caregiver well-being.11 Overall, the success of this
approach underlined the importance and utility of having detailed information about the
content, structure, and delivery methods of interventions and a common language for
describing intervention components.
Expansion of the REACH Taxonomy
To generalize to intervention studies beyond one set of clinical trials, we chose the Health
Maintenance Consortium (HMC) studies as they represented a wide range of intervention
approaches and target behaviors. The goal of HMC, a trans-NIH collaborative effort initially
funded in 2004, is to conduct both process and intervention studies to test different theoretical
models for achieving long-term health-related behavioral change.13 The behaviors targeted in
the HMC studies include lifestyle behaviors associated with chronic illness (eg, tobacco
cessation, exercise, nutrition) as well as the prevention of more risky behaviors (eg, substance
abuse, HIV-related sexual behaviors).
Using a consensus process, we (RS, SC, JM, SB) reviewed the protocols of the 18 HMC
intervention studies to capture elements of the interventions, not captured in our original
taxonomy, which were important to subsequent replication efforts. On the basis of this review,
the taxonomy was revised to include expanded operational definitions of treatment delivery
characteristics, treatment content strategies, and mechanisms of treatment action.
Pilot Testing and Refinement
The expanded taxonomy was pilot tested by having 4 HMC investigators not involved in the
taxonomy development process evaluate and apply the taxonomy to their studies. A detailed
structured survey instrument, which included the categories in the taxonomy, was used to rate
the interventions. Based on feedback from the pilot testing, the taxonomy was further refined.
The refinement included clarification of instructions and expansion of options for mode of
treatment delivery (eg, Internet contact), treatment strategies, target behaviors, and location of
treatment delivery.
Testing the Taxonomy
The refined intervention taxonomy was then tested by having 18 HMC investigators not
involved in the previous pilot test each apply the taxonomy to their interventions being tested
in the HMC consortium. Investigators were given a structured survey instrument to assess each
study. The investigators concurred that the taxonomy comprehensively captured key
intervention components of all studies.
To further establish the generalizability of the taxonomy to studies not included in the HMC,
we asked 3 additional non-HMC researchers at the University of Pittsburgh and the University
of Miami to apply the taxonomy to diverse studies ranging from clinical medical trials
(pharmacologic and psychotherapeutic intervention for lower back pain) to psychosocial/
behavioral interventions (treatments for chronic fatigue syndrome and for depressed caregivers
of persons with spinal cord injury). These researchers concurred that use of the taxonomy was
feasible and that it adequately captured components of their heterogeneous intervention
approaches.
Schulz et al. Page 3
Am J Health Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
RESULTS
Components of this final taxonomy, their definitions, and the rationale for including them are
presented below. Our discussion is organized into 2 broad categories: delivery characteristics
(Table 1) and intervention content (Table 2).
Treatment Delivery Characteristics
How a treatment is delivered has multiple dimensions, such as mode of delivery, materials
used, location, and dose, many of which are routinely reported in descriptions of intervention
studies. For example, across the HMC interventions the most common mode of delivery was
face to face (84%); the most common locations for delivering interventions were clinical
research space (41%), participant’s home (31%), and participant’s work site (25%). These
delivery characteristics are included in the taxonomy along with less commonly described
delivery attributes, including sensitivity to participant characteristics, intervention adaptability
(ie, the extent to which the intervention can be modified), interventionist selection and training,
and treatment implementation. Our discussion focuses on these additional attributes because
they have received little attention in the literature and represent important elements of an
intervention protocol.3
Sensitivity to Participant Characteristics
The attitudes, behaviors, and cultural competence of health care providers, who are
predominantly white, have been identified as possible contributing factors to health disparities
between blacks and whites and other racial/ethnic groups. For example, research suggests that
African Americans prefer to receive health care from physicians of the same race13–17 and
report receiving better health care from physicians of the same race.16,18 Although there are
no randomized trials that systematically test the effects of racial matching in intervention
studies, there is some evidence that such matching may be important. For example, a study on
youth and their families in multisystematic therapy found that adherence ratings were higher
when caregiver and therapist were ethnically matched.19 A post hoc analysis of the REACH I
trials, which included white, Hispanic, and African American family caregivers of dementia
patients, showed that African American caregivers with an interventionist of the same race had
greater decreases in depression than did African American caregivers with interventionists of
a different race or ethnicity.20 These data suggest that one should consider issues of racial
concordance in designing and reporting studies including interventionists.
Other important issues to consider include whether (a) interventionists and assessors were
knowledgeable about and received special training in the perspectives and values of the target
population, (b) the design of treatment strategies included layperson or community input, and
(c) the intervention was delivered in the participant’s preferred language. Related issues include
the extent to which the interventions were adapted to accommodate other participant
characteristics, such as literacy or vision and hearing impairments.21 (Table 1). In the context
of medical treatment trials, participant characteristics such as weight or concomitant medical
conditions could affect dosage.
Adaptability
Adapting or tailoring an intervention to the unique needs and preferences of each participant
has become a commonplace strategy for many interventions22–25 and is increasingly becoming
a feature of health care delivery in general.26 The rationale underlying this approach is that
adherence and effectiveness will be greater if the intervention accommodates to individual
variability in needs, preferences, and response to treatment. There is substantial range in the
degree to which and how an intervention can be adapted.
Schulz et al. Page 4
Am J Health Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
A key distinction in the context of intervention studies is between adaptability within
interventions (ie, variability in treatment as the treatment is being delivered) versus adaptive
designs that focus on decision rules for assigning participants to treatments. We do not discuss
further adaptive designs (eg, sequential, enrichment) 22–25,27 but rather focus on adaptability
as an intervention characteristic as described below.
Our taxonomy (Table 1) includes 3 dimensions of adaptability: (a) what aspects of the
intervention can be adapted, (b) who or what determines that an adaptation should be made,
and (c) when in the course of the intervention such adaptations can be made. With respect to
what can be adapted, this could potentially be any aspect of intervention delivery and content.
For example, it might include flexibility in the number of sessions devoted to a particular
treatment module28 or the specific content of a treatment module or patient support aid.29,
30 The intervention may also allow changes in the number, duration, or scheduling of sessions
(eg, across the HMC treatment conditions, 28% allowed changes in the number of session,
23% in the scheduling of sessions, and 19% in the duration of sessions), the dosage intensity
(eg, due to side effects), or the treatment delivery mode (eg, in person vs telephone). It is
important, for the purposes of replication and translation, to have precise decision rules about
what can and cannot be changed and to carefully record what was altered.
The second dimension of adaptability concerns the decision rules for making changes and
requires defining who makes decisions and the criteria used to make them. An intervention
may be adapted in response to a spontaneous request from a participant or on the basis of formal
decision rules specified as part of the intervention protocol.23
The third dimension of adaptability relates to when, in the course of treatment, an adaptation
can be made. An intervention may include a baseline needs or risk assessment of the participant
that is used to guide the content of the intervention such that high need or risk areas receive
more attention than low need/risk areas as was the case in the REACH II trial.11 Interventions
can also be adapted to the participants’ progress or status during treatment on the basis of
clinical judgments. The degree of latitude varies substantially, ranging from, for example,
“standard of care” to a detailed algorithm that must be followed for any treatment change. For
example, in one of the HMC studies, a brief assessment of current risk and protective factors
for alcohol relapse was done at the start of every clinical contact and used to determine whether
treatment should be intensified, stepped down, or kept at the same level. Additionally,
intervention studies must be responsive to unanticipated secular events that might affect
intervention response and outcomes, and ethics of continuation. These events may include
reports of promising new treatments related to the goals of an intervention or new knowledge
about adverse effects of treatment.
Treatment Implementation
It is important to measure the extent to which treatment was implemented as intended, which,
if low, could threaten internal validity31 and ultimately external validity. Multiple measurement
strategies are available to assess treatment implementation, and there is broad consensus that
there are 3 key components of treatment implementation: (a) treatment delivery, the extent to
which the appropriate quantity and content of intervention was delivered as intended; (b)
treatment receipt, the degree to which the participant received and understood the intended
treatment, as indicated by mastery of concepts or skills targeted by the intervention; and (c)
treatment enactment, the degree to which the participant demonstrates changes in behaviors
related to the intervention beyond the intervention context.32,33
With respect to treatment delivery, a minimum requirement is an accurate record of the
frequency, duration, and types of contact between interventionist and participant. A more
challenging task is monitoring the content of interventions, particularly those with multiple
Schulz et al. Page 5
Am J Health Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
components. This can be achieved by using highly scripted intervention protocols and
reviewing intervention sessions through notes or audio-recordings.
Treatment receipt is designed to assess the extent to which the participant “gets” or “buys into”
the intervention. This might include increased knowledge, skills, and motivation, enhanced
self-efficacy, greater social integration, or changes in pathophysiology. From an intervention-
design perspective, it is important to both articulate what these mechanisms are and develop a
measurement strategy for capturing them.
Treatment enactment involves the generalization of processes and goals to situations outside
the therapeutic session. To what extent is the client able and motivated to appropriately use
newly acquired knowledge or skills in his or her everyday environments?34 Strategies for
assessing enactment might include directly observing the participant or obtaining self-reports
from the participant or reports from other observers of the participant. It is important to note
that enactment is not the same as outcome. Enactment focuses on the application of skills and
knowledge imparted by the intervention, not whether or not the desired outcome is attained.
Intervention Content
There is no standard taxonomy for describing the content of interventions, even though there
is strong consensus that one is needed.35–37 With the exception of one study specifically
designed to develop a taxonomy of behavior change techniques,35 most efforts in this arena
are implicit rather than explicit. Meta-analyses of intervention studies typically involve
characterizing intervention content along one or several dimensions that are thought to be
related to outcomes. For example, a recent meta-analysis of behavioral interventions to prevent
childhood obesity assessed the efficacy of 4 different strategies for interventions aimed at
changing lifestyle behaviors—increased physical activity, decreased sedentary activity,
increased healthy dietary habits, and decreased unhealthy dietary habits.38 Another common
approach is to evaluate the efficacy of a specific strategy such as computer technology-based
HIV prevention interventions.39 However, combining information across studies without a
standard taxonomy has a number of limitations. First, interventions included in meta-analyses
are typically tailored to the content area of the intervention and may not easily be generalized
to other research domains. Second, because meta-analyses are based on completed studies,
they reflect what has been done as opposed to what might be done. Third, the extent to which
multicomponent interventions can be decomposed into subcategories is constrained by the
competing demand to maximize the number of studies that can be included in a meta-analysis.
These limitations argue for a taxonomic system that is generic enough to apply to a wide range
of studies, yet specific enough to generate meaningful categories of intervention content.
The taxonomy presented here distinguishes between strategies and mechanisms of action
(Table 2), related aspects that address how intervention is delivered to the client and how it
works. Examples of intervention strategies found in the behavioral change literature include
providing information, using incentives or reinforcements for desired behaviors, tracking and
monitoring behavior, teaching problem solving, skill building, using stress-management
techniques, and providing social support.
Strategies of delivering interventions can affect outcomes through multiple actions. For
example, information provision is thought to enhance knowledge, the ability to assess risks/
goals, as well as improve behavioral and problem-solving skills. Problem solving and skill-
building strategies are thought to enhance not only specific skills but also self-efficacy and
motivation.
Although most intervention studies identify the treatment strategies used, not all studies specify
the mechanisms thought to affect treatment outcomes, and even fewer studies collect data
Schulz et al. Page 6
Am J Health Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
assessing mediators of treatment effect. We emphasize mechanisms of action because of their
importance in theory development and testing. Understanding mechanisms of action also helps
elucidate pathways through which the content of interventions affect desired changes in
behavior. This helps to identify aspects of an intervention that are successful and those that
need to be eliminated or modified.
CONCLUSION
Our goal is to expand existing taxonomies for characterizing interventions by identifying
elements that might be related to outcomes and thus are crucial for replication and extension
of intervention science. To be sure, our taxonomy is likely to be most useful for characterizing
complex, multicomponent behavioral studies of the type carried out by the Health Maintenance
consortium, but the taxonomy has utility as well for simpler randomized clinical trials. Having
comprehensive and standardized taxonomies for characterizing interventions is important for
several reasons.
First, taxonomies serve as useful tools in developing interventions and alerting the researcher
to elements of interventions that should be addressed prior to study implementation. Our
taxonomy goes beyond existing classification systems by including issues such as cultural
sensitivity; intervention adaptability; measures of treatment delivery, receipt, and enactment;
treatment content strategies; and mechanisms of action. A good taxonomy should lead to
improved intervention design and execution and foster cross-study similarities.
Second, consistent and comprehensive descriptions of interventions facilitate systematic
exploration of the efficacy of intervention components through post hoc and cross-study
analyses. The availability of comprehensive standardized descriptions of intervention studies
expands the range of questions that might be tested through meta-analysis. For example, one
reason hypotheses such as the effects of racial matching have not been extensively explored
in the literature is the lack of attention paid to this variable in both the design and description
of studies. In addition, the availability of information on dose, delivery method, content
strategy, and participant characteristics enables researchers to explore complex interactions
among these attributes. Although various categories of these attributes and their combinations
could be systematically tested in randomized trials, this is not feasible. The cost and time to
evaluate the efficacy of individual components of complex interventions would be prohibitive.
An alternative strategy is to articulate clearly a detailed conceptual framework and explore the
role of variables defining that framework across multiple studies. This strategy, successfully
implemented in REACH,10 can help to identify critical components of interventions for future
studies. Detailed descriptions of intervention studies can also facilitate decisions about the
feasibility of implementing an intervention in broader community settings.40
Another benefit of a good intervention taxonomy is that it can improve the quality of
intervention science. There is broad consensus in the scientific community about what
constitutes a good study.41 For example, well-implemented randomized experiments are better
than well-implemented studies using matching strategies to equate groups. Other quality
criteria include fit between concepts and operations (eg, treatment delivered vs treatment
intended); validity of comparisons (eg, the extent to which participants in multiple treatment
arms were comparable); generality of findings (eg, representativeness of participants, ability
to replicate treatments in various settings); and accuracy, precision, and relevance of outcome
estimation (eg, whether the outcomes are appropriate to the intervention and the extent to which
they can be measured in a general setting). Knowing the delivery characteristics and content
of an intervention is critical to making judgments about the quality of a study.
Schulz et al. Page 7
Am J Health Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The stimulus to develop this taxonomy was to shed light on how interventions are thought
about and described in the research literature. The added value is to aid in intervention design,
replication, and cross-study evaluations. We provide specific recommendations about key
features of interventions that need to be considered in the design, execution, and reporting of
intervention studies. Although it may not be feasible to include this level of detail in published
manuscripts, the level of detail may be more practically posted on Web sites linked to the
published article. Although trying to be exhaustive in generating this taxonomy, we anticipate
that additional attributes may come to light as this taxonomy is applied to future studies. When
carefully considered to avoid redundancy or overcomplication, such additions would serve to
further expand the utility and applicability of this system.
Acknowledgments
Preparation of this manuscript was supported in part by grants from NIH R01 NR009573, R01 HD047143. P30
MH071944, R24 HL076852, R24 HL076858, the Alzheimer’s Association IIRG-07-59784, and NSF 0540856, and
R24.
REFERENCES
1. Moher D, Schulz KF, Altman D. The CONSORT statement: revised recommendations for improving
the quality of reports of parallel-group randomized trials. JAMA 2001;285(15):1987–1991. [PubMed:
11308435]
2. Moher D, Jones A, Lepage L. Use of the CONSORT statement and quality of reports of randomized
trials: A comparative before-and-after evaluation. JAMA 2001;295(15):1992–1995. [PubMed:
11308436]
3. Davidson KW, Goldstein M, Kaplan RM, et al. Evidence-Based Behavioral Medicine: What is it and
how do we achieve it? Ann Behav Med 2003;26(30):161–171. [PubMed: 14644692]
4. Des Jarlais DC, Lyles C, Crepaz N. (TREND Group). Improving the reporting quality of
nonrandomized evaluations of behavioral and public health interventions: the TREND statement. Am
J Public Health 2004;94(3):361–366. [PubMed: 14998794]
5. Green LW, Glasgow RE. Evaluating the relevance, generalization, and applicability of research: Issues
in external validation and translation methodology. Eval Health Prof 2006;29(1):126–153. [PubMed:
16510882]
6. Steckler A, McLeroy KR. The importance of external validity. Am J Public Health 2008;98:9–10.
[PubMed: 18048772]
7. Schulz R, Belle SH, Czaja SJ, et al. Introduction to the special section on Resources for Enhancing
Alzheimer’s Caregiver Health (REACH). Psychol Aging 2003;18(3):357–360. [PubMed: 14518799]
8. Gitlin L, Belle SH, Burgio L, et al. Effect of multicomponent interventions on caregiver burden and
depression: The REACH multisite initiative at 6-month follow-up. Psychol Aging 2003;18(3):361–
374. [PubMed: 14518800]
9. Czaja SJ, Schulz R, Lee CC, Belle SH. A methodology for describing and decomposing complex
psychosocial and behavioral interventions. Psychol Aging 2003;18(3):385–395. [PubMed: 14518802]
10. Belle SH, Czaja SJ, Schulz R, et al. Using a new taxonomy to combine the uncombinable: Integrating
results across diverse caregiving interventions. Psychol Aging 2003;18(3):396–405. [PubMed:
14518803]
11. Belle SH, Burgio L, Burns R, et al. (REACH II investigators). Enhancing the quality of life of dementia
caregivers from different ethnic or racial groups. Ann Intern Med 2006;145(10):727–738. [PubMed:
17116917]
12. Ory MG, Jordan PJ, Bazzarre T. The Behavior Change Consortium: setting the stage for a new century
of health behavior. Health Educ Res 2002;17(6):691–695. [PubMed: 12507344]
13. Cooper LA, Roter DL, Johnson RL, et al. Patient-centered communication, ratings of care, and
concordance of patient and physician race. Ann Intern Med 2003;139(11):907–915. [PubMed:
14644893]
Schulz et al. Page 8
Am J Health Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
14. Garcia JA, Paterniti DA, Romano PS, Kravitz RL. Patient preferences for physician characteristics
in university-based primary care clinics. Ethn Dis 2003;13(2):259–267. [PubMed: 12785424]
15. Saha S, Arbelaez JJ, Cooper LA. Patient-physician relationships and racial disparities in the quality
of health care. Am J Public Health 2003;93(10):1713–1719. [PubMed: 14534227]
16. Saha S, Komaromy M, Koepsell TD, Bindman AB. Patient-physician racial concordance and the
perceived quality and use of health care. Arch Intern Med 1999;159(9):997–1004. [PubMed:
10326942]
17. Saha S, Taggart SH, Komaromy M, Bindman AB. Do patients choose physicians of their own race?
Health Aff 2000;19(4):76–83.
18. Laveist TA, Nuru-Jeter A. Is doctor-patient race concordance associated with greater satisfaction with
care? J Health Soc Behav 2002;43(3):296–306. [PubMed: 12467254]
19. Schoenwald SK, Halliday-Boykins CA, Henggeler SW. Participant-level predictors of adherence to
MST in community service settings. Fam Process 2003;42(3):345–359. [PubMed: 14606199]
20. McGinnis KA, Schulz R, Stone RA, et al. Concordance of race or ethnicity of interventionists and
caregivers of dementia patients: relationship to attrition and treatment outcomes in the REACH study.
Gerontologist 2006;46(4):449–455. [PubMed: 16920998]
21. Hill-Briggs F, Lazo M, Renosky R, Ewing C. Usability of a diabetes and cardiovascular education
module in an African American diabetic sample with physical, visual and cognitive impairment.
Rehabilitation Psychology 2008;53(1):1–8.
22. McKay JR. Continuing care research: what we have learned and where we are going. J Subst Abuse
Treat 2009a;36(2):131–145. [PubMed: 19161894]
23. McKay, JR. Treating Substance Use Disorders with Adaptive Continuing Care. Washington DC:
American Psychological Association Press; 2009b.
24. Murphy SA, Lynch KG, McKay JR, et al. Developing adaptive treatment strategies in substance abuse
research. Drug Alcohol Depend 2007;88:S24–S30. [PubMed: 17056207]
25. Rakowski W, Lipkus IM, Clark MA, et al. Reminder letter, tailored stepped-care, and self-choice
comparison for repeat mammography. Am J Prev Med 2003;25:308–314. [PubMed: 14580632]
26. Audet AM, Davis K, Schoenbaum SC. Adoption of patient-centered care practices by physicians:
Results from a national survey. Arch Intern Med 2006;166(7):754–759. [PubMed: 16606812]
27. Mehta C, Gao P, Bhatt DL, et al. Optimizing trial design, sequential, adaptive, and enrichment
strategies. Circulation 2009;119(4):597–605. [PubMed: 19188520]
28. Safren SA, O’Cleirigh C, Tan JY, et al. A randomized controlled trial of cognitive behavioral therapy
for adherence (CBT-AD) in HIV-Infected Individuals. Health Psychol 2009;28(1):1–10. [PubMed:
19210012]
29. Schulz R, Czaja SJ, Lustig A, et al. Improving the quality of life of caregivers of persons with spinal
cord injury: A randomized controlled Trial. Rehabilitation Psychology 2009;54(1):1–15. [PubMed:
19618698]
30. Schwartz MD, Valdimarsdottir TA, DeMarco BN, et al. Randomized trial of a brief decision aid for
BRCX1/BRCA2 mutation carriers: impact of measures of decision making and satisfaction. Health
Psychol 2009;26(1):11–19. [PubMed: 19210013]
31. Burgio L, Lichstein KL, Nichols L, et al. (REACH Investigators). Judging outcomes in psychosocial
interventions for dementia caregivers: the problem of treatment implementation. Gerontologist
2001;41(4):481–489. [PubMed: 11490046]
32. Lichstein KL, Riedel BW, Grieve R. Fair tests of clinical trials: a treatment implementation model.
Advances in Behaviour Research and Therapy 1994;16:1–29.
33. Egan M, Bambra C, Petticrew M, Whitehead M. Reviewing evidence on complex social interventions:
appraising implementation in systematic reviews of the health effects of organisational-level
workplace interventions. J Epidemiol Community Health 2009;63(1):4–11. [PubMed: 18718981]
34. Frank JC, Coviak CP, Healy TC, et al. Addressing fidelity in evidence-based health promotion
programs for older adults. Journal of Applied Gerontology 2008;27(1):4–33.
35. Abraham C, Michie S. A taxonomy of behavior change techniques used in interventions. Health
Psychol 2008;27(3):379–387. [PubMed: 18624603]
Schulz et al. Page 9
Am J Health Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
36. Neumann MS, Johnson WD, Semaan S, et al. Review and meta-analysis of HIV prevention
intervention research for heterosexual adult populations in the United States. J Acquir Immune Defic
Syndr 2002;30 Suppl 1:S106–S117. [PubMed: 12107364]
37. Semaan S, Des Jarlais DC, Sogolow E, et al. A meta-analysis of the effect of HIV prevention
interventions on the sex behaviors of drug users in the United States. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr
2002;30 Suppl 1:S73–S93. [PubMed: 12107362]
38. Kamath CC, Vickers KS, Ehrlich A, et al. Behavioral interventions to prevent childhood obesity: a
systematic review and meta-analyses of randomized trials. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008;93(12):
4606–4615. [PubMed: 18782880]
39. Noar S, Black HG, Pierce LB. Efficacy of computer technology-based HIV prevention interventions:
A meta-analysis. AIDS 2009;23(1):107–115. [PubMed: 19050392]
40. Rychetnik L, Frommer M, Hawe P, Shiell A. Criteria for evaluating evidence on public health
interventions. J Epidemiol Community Health 2002;56(2):119–127. [PubMed: 11812811]
41. Valentine JC, Cooper H. A systematic and transparent approach for assessing the methodological
quality of intervention effectiveness research: The Study Design and Implementation Assessment
Device (Study DIAD). Psychol Methods 2008;13(2):130–149. [PubMed: 18557682]
Schulz et al. Page 10
Am J Health Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Schulz et al. Page 11
Table 1
Taxonomy for Delivery Characteristics
Dimension Definition Options Checklist
Mode Method of contact between
interventionist and
participant
• Face to face (individual or group)
• Telephone (individual or group)
• Internet (individual or group)
• Video/CD instruction
• Telephone contact with computer
• Mailing of written material
• Personal digital assistant (PDA), cell phone
Materials Materials used in the
delivery of the intervention
• Manuals/workbooks
• Information sheets/checklists
• Pamphlets
• Videotapes
• Audiotapes
• CDs/DVDs
• Assistive devices
• Internet
Location Where the intervention is
delivered
• Participant’s home
• Classroom
• Health care provider’s office
• Hospital, clinic, operating room
• Work site
• Community center
• Nursing home
• Group residence facility
• Research facility
Schedule Duration and intensity of
intervention
• Overall duration of the intervention
• Number of sessions
• Minutes of contact per session
• Distribution of sessions over time
Scripting Level of detail guiding
interaction between the
interventionist and the
participant
• Exact script/protocol provided
• Specific language provided with elaboration allowed/not allowed
• Goals/tasks specified but no further scripting
• General guidelines provided
Sensitivity to
participant
characteristics
Extent to which participant
background, experience
and abilities are
incorporated in the delivery
of intervention
• Intervention materials and delivery in language preferred by
participant
• Materials written for specific reading or health literacy level
• Visual supplements, augmentative communication devices for
hearing impaired
Am J Health Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Schulz et al. Page 12
Dimension Definition Options Checklist
• Oral supplements and visual enhancements for vision impaired
Interventionist
characteristics
Qualifications and training,
concordance with
participant characteristics
• Required disciplinary/professional expertise for interventionists
• Licensing/certification requirements
• Type and quantity of training provided
• Proficiency tests passed
• Race/ethnicity/age/gender matching of interventionist to participant
• Intervention staff recruited from participant community
• Interventionist knowledgeable of cultural views and values of
participants
Adaptability Extent to which intervention can be
modified.
• What can be modified
• On what basis modifications
are made
• When in the course of the study
modifications can be made
What:
• number/schedule/duration of sessions
• location
• mode of delivery
• content/target
• dosage
On what basis:
• participant assessment
• participant progress
• spontaneous request
• secular event
• clinical judgment
• checklist/lab test results, performance outcomes
When:
• intake
• baseline
• specified intervals during intervention
Treatment
implementation
Treatment Delivery:
Documentation of
interventionist compliance
to intended treatment and
modifications
Treatment Receipt:
Extent to which processes
are implemented by
participant and/or goals are
met
Treatment Enactment:
Extent to which knowledge
and skills acquired during
treatment are applied in
real world settings outside
of treatment
• Number and duration of sessions
• Content delivered
• Knowledge, skills, motivation, self-efficacy, social support/
integration, changes in pathophysiology assessed in participant
• Direct observation, self-report, observer report of participant
Am J Health Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Schulz et al. Page 13
Table 2
Content and Goals of Intervention
Dimension Definition Options Checklist
Treatment
content
strategies
Specific strategies aimed at
improving outcomes
• Provision of feedback to participant through tracking and monitoring
• Provision of information
• Behavioral incentives/reinforcements
• Didactic instruction
• Skill-Building techniques
• Problem-Solving techniques
• Stress-Management techniques
• Facilitation of social support
• Biologic interventions (surgery, medications, radiation)
• Structure /process modifications (eg, staffing, scheduling, communications)
Mechanisms of
action
Key processes, goals, or
mediators of desired
treatment outcomes
• Ability to assess risks/goals
• Knowledge
• Behavioral skills
• Problem-Solving skills
• Motivation
• Self-efficacy
• Social support
• Social engagement
• Environmental motivation
• Change in policies/regulations
• Biologic pathways
Am J Health Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.