20 Predicting and Changing Behavior
by Fishbein allowed us to again start working together in 2001, when we
began to reconcile the differences between our models.
the reasoned action approach□
We are now ready to provide an outline of our theory of behavioral pre-
diction in its most current form. The starting point of our analysis is a
particular behavior of interest to the investigator. It is therefore of utmost
importance that the behavior under consideration be clearly identified
and properly operationalized. This is not as easy as it might at first appear.
We will discuss some of the problems associated with definition and mea-
surement of behavior in Chapter 2.
Once the behavior of interest is clearly identified we can begin to exam-
ine its determinants. Basically, we assume that human social behavior fol-
lows reasonably and often spontaneously from the information or beliefs
people possess about the behavior under consideration. These beliefs
originate in a variety of sources, such as personal experiences, formal
education, radio, newspapers, TV, the Internet and other media, and inter-
actions with family and friends. Individual differences (e.g., demographic
characteristics, personality) can influence not only the experiences people
have and the sources of information to which they are exposed but also
the ways they interpret and remember this information. Consequently,
individuals from different social backgrounds or with different personal-
ity traits are also likely to differ in the beliefs they hold.
No matter how beliefs associated with a given behavior are acquired,
they serve to guide the decision to perform or not perform the behavior in
question. Specifically, three kinds of beliefs are distinguished. First, peo-
ple hold beliefs about the positive or negative consequences they might
experience if they performed the behavior. These outcome expectancies or
behavioral beliefs are assumed to determine people’s attitude toward person-
ally performing the behavior—that is, their positive or negative evaluation of
their performing the behavior in question. In general, to the extent that
their performance of the behavior is perceived to result in more positive
than negative outcomes, the attitude toward the behavior will be favor-
able. Second, people form beliefs that important individuals or groups in
their lives would approve or disapprove of their performing the behavior
as well as beliefs that these referents themselves perform or don’t perform
the behavior in question. In their totality, these injunctive and descriptive
normative beliefs produce a perceived norm, that is, perceived social pres-
sure to engage or not engage in the behavior. If more important others
are believed to approve than disapprove, and if the majority of important
others perform the behavior, people are likely to perceive social pressure
Introduction 21
to engage in the behavior. Finally, people also form beliefs about personal
and environmental factors that can help or impede their attempts to carry
out the behavior. In their aggregate, these control beliefs result in a sense of
high or low self-efficacy (Bandura, 1986, 1997) or perceived behavioral control
with regard to the behavior. If control beliefs identify more facilitating
than inhibiting factors, perceived behavioral control should be high.
Once attitudes, perceived norms, and perceived behavioral control
have been formed they are directly accessible and available to guide
intentions and behavior. Specifically, in combination, attitude toward the
behavior, perceived norm, and perception of behavioral control lead to
the formation of a behavioral intention, or a readiness to perform the behavior.
As a general rule, the more favorable the attitude and perceived norm,
and the greater the perceived behavioral control, the stronger should be
the person’s intention to perform the behavior in question. However, the
relative importance or weight of these three determinants of intentions is
expected to vary from one behavior to another and from one population
to another.
The intention formed in this fashion is now available to determine per-
formance of the behavior. The stronger the intention, the more likely it
is that the behavior will be carried out. It is well recognized, however,
that lack of requisite skills and abilities, or presence of environmental
constraints, can prevent people from acting on their intentions. That is,
they may lack actual control over performance of the behavior. It is only
when people do have control over behavioral performance that intention
is expected to be a good predictor of behavior. Actual behavioral control
thus moderates the effect of intentions on behavior. To predict and under-
stand behavior fully, we therefore have to assess not only intentions but
also actual behavioral control (i.e., relevant skills and abilities as well as
barriers to and facilitators of behavioral performance). For most behaviors,
however, measures of actual control are not available. In those instances,
we can use our measures of perceived behavioral control as a proxy. To the
extent that perceived behavioral control accurately reflects actual control,
it can be used to improve behavioral prediction.
Figure 1.1 is a schematic representation of our reasoned action frame-
work. The theory suggests that intention is the best single predictor of
behavior but that it is also important to take skills and abilities as well as
environmental factors (i.e., behavioral control) into account. At the low-
est level of explanation, therefore, people are said to perform a behavior
because they intend to do so, they have the requisite skills and abilities,
and there are no environmental constraints to prevent them from car-
rying out their intentions (i.e., they have favorable intentions and actual
behavioral control). At the next level we achieve a deeper understanding
by considering the determinants of intentions. We now learn that people
will intend to (and thus will) perform a behavior if they have positive
22 Predicting and Changing Behavior
attitudes toward personally performing the behavior and if they perceive
normative pressure to do so. However, even under these circumstances
they may not form an intention to perform the behavior if they believe
that they lack control over performing the behavior. Consider, for example,
the decision faced by academics or other professionals to attend or not
attend a professional conference or meeting. They may favorably evaluate
attending the conference and experience social pressure to attend, but if
they have made prior commitments they cannot break, or if they lack the
financial resources to cover the cost of registration, transportation, food,
and lodging, they will perceive that they cannot attend the meeting and
thus may form an intention to not attend the conference.
The fact that the three predictors of intentions can take on different
weights tells us that the intention to perform a given behavior is based on
a particular combination of attitudinal, normative, and control consider-
ations. Thus, some people may attend a professional conference because
they have positive attitudes toward this behavior, whereas other may do
so because of perceived social pressure. The relative importance of the
different predictors can vary from one population to another. Thus, at one
university some professors may fail to attend a professional conference
because of control issues, but at another they may not attend the confer-
ence because they perceive social pressure against this behavior, that is,
because their colleagues and other important referents don’t approve of
their going to this particular conference.
This level of analysis can also help explain why people with similar
attitudes, perceived norms, and perceptions of control behave in different
ways. Consider two professors at a given university, one male the other
Background
factors
Actual control
Skills/abilities
Environmental
factors
Perceived
behavioral
control
Perceived
norm
Attitude
toward the
behavior
Behavioral
beliefs
Normative
beliefs
Control
beliefs
Intention Behavior
Individual
Personality
Mood, emotion
Values, stereotypes
General attitudes
Perceived risk
Past behavior
Social
Education
Age, gender
Income
Religion
Race, ethnicity
Culture
Information
Knowledge
Media
Intervention
fIgure 1.1 Schematic presentation of the reasoned action model.
Introduction 23
female, who both value attending a conference and believe that they could
do so but at the same time perceive social pressure not to attend. If among
males the intention to attend the conference is primarily influenced by per-
ceived norms whereas among females this intention is largely controlled
by attitudes, we would expect that the female professor will attend the
conference whereas the male professor will not.
It is at the next level, the level of beliefs, that we gain most of the con-
crete information unique to a given behavior. At this level we learn about
the substantive considerations that guide people’s decisions to perform
or not to perform the behavior of interest. This level of analysis offers
insight into the ways people think about the behavior: about its likely
consequences, the demands placed on them by others, as well as the
required resources, possible barriers, and other issues of control. Thus, we
may learn that many professors believe that attending a particular con-
ference will enable them to acquire important information and to make
new professional connections (behavioral beliefs), that their spouses and
department chairs approve and most of their colleagues plan to attend
(normative beliefs), and that they have the required time and financial
resources (control beliefs). This pattern of beliefs would reasonably lead to
a decision to attend the professional meeting. Other individuals, however,
may be found to hold a different set of beliefs. Although they may also
believe that they have the time and resources to attend the conference,
they may believe that they would learn very little of professional value
and that there is very little support among professional friends and col-
leagues for attending this meeting. Clearly, these individuals would be
much less likely to attend.
It should also be clear that information of this kind can be used to
design effective behavior change interventions. By identifying behav-
ioral, normative, and control beliefs that discriminate between individu-
als who perform the behavior of interest and individuals who do not, we
can design properly targeted behavioral interventions.
Note that Figure 1.1 provides an oversimplified representation of our
theoretical framework, a representation that lacks important conceptual
distinctions as well as feedback loops and other relations among the con-
structs. Throughout this book we will expand on our theory, address a
variety of issues raised by our earlier work, and fill in missing details.
the nature of reasoned action
At this point we must address a common misconception regarding our
reasoned action approach. Because we have used the terms reasoned
action and planned behavior in our past work, many investigators mistak-
enly believe that we consider people to be rational and to deliberate at
24 Predicting and Changing Behavior
length before engaging in any behavior. This has never been our position.
As we shall see in subsequent chapters, our theoretical framework does
not assume rationality, and it encompasses both deliberative and spon-
taneous decision making. The processes previously described whereby
people arrive at their intentions represents a “reasoned” approach to
the explanation and prediction of social behavior only in the sense that
people’s behavioral intentions are assumed to follow in a reasonable, con-
sistent, and often automatic fashion from their beliefs about performing
the behavior. This does not mean that people are assumed to be always
logical or rational. The beliefs they hold need not be veridical; they may
be inaccurate, biased, or even irrational. However, once a set of beliefs is
formed it provides the cognitive foundation from which attitudes, per-
ceived norms, and perceptions of control—and ultimately intentions and
behaviors—are assumed to follow in a reasonable and consistent fashion.
Moreover, the formation of attitudes, perceived norms, and perceptions of
control—and the intentions they produce—do not have to involve a great
deal of deliberation but can follow spontaneously and automatically from
the underlying cognitive foundation of beliefs. As a general rule, people
are likely to engage in careful deliberation when they are confronted with
a novel situation or when they confront an important decision. Under
these conditions they may well evaluate the likely consequences of the
behavioral options, imagine what other people would want them to do or
what important others would do themselves and consider the factors that
may make it easy or difficult for them to perform the behavior in question.
Such elaborate information processing is much less likely when people
are confronted with performing a familiar behavior or when they make a
relatively unimportant behavioral decision. These issues are discussed in
greater detail in Chapters 8 and 9.
Background factors
We saw that according to our reasoned action approach the major pre-
dictors of intentions and actions follow reasonably from—and can be
understood in terms of—behavioral, normative, and control beliefs. This
approach, however, does not address the origins of these beliefs. Clearly,
a multitude of variables could potentially influence the beliefs people
hold: age, gender, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, education, nationality,
religious affiliation, personality, mood, emotion, general attitudes and
values, intelligence, group membership, past experiences, exposure to
information, social support, and coping skills. Our model of behavioral
prediction recognizes the potential importance of such background fac-
tors. However, the dotted arrows in Figure 1.1 indicate that, although a
given background factor may in fact influence behavioral, normative, or
Introduction 25
control beliefs, there is no necessary connection between background fac-
tors and beliefs. Whether a given belief is or is not affected by a particular
background factor is an empirical question. In light of the vast number of
potentially relevant background factors, it is difficult to know which ones
should be considered without a theory to guide selection in the behavioral
domain of interest. Theories of this kind are not part of our conceptual
framework but can complement it by identifying relevant background fac-
tors and thereby deepen our understanding of a behavior’s determinants
(see Petraitis, Flay, & Miller, 1995).
In fact, we saw earlier that research in different behavioral domains
has focused primarily on what we would now call background factors:
general attitudinal and personality dispositions as well as demographic
characteristics. The findings obtained in this research can serve as a guide
for the kinds of background factors that are relevant for understanding
the likely origins of behavioral, normative, and control beliefs concerning
a given behavior. For example, it has been found that the decision to hire
a member of a minority group is, to some extent, influenced by prejudice
toward the group in question (e.g., Dovidio & Gaertner, 2000). Given this
finding, it is reasonable to expect that prejudiced individuals will hold dif-
ferent beliefs about hiring the minority applicant than will nonprejudiced
individuals. For example, in comparison with nonprejudiced individu-
als, people prejudiced toward African Americans may be more likely to
believe that hiring an African American applicant would adversely affect
productivity and create interpersonal problems in the workplace. They
may also be more likely to believe that friends and current employees
would disapprove of such a hiring decision. However, as we noted in our
review of research on discriminatory behavior, most studies report little
or no relation between prejudice and many specific behaviors directed
at minority group members. Such negative findings are explained if it is
found that people high and low in prejudice do not differ in their behav-
ioral, normative, or control beliefs regarding the particular behaviors
investigated. We have more to say about the role of background factors in
Chapters 7 and 8.
related reasoned action Models
The notion that behavior follows reasonably from information or beliefs
about the behavior is not unique to our model (see Fishbein et al., 2001). For
example, Bandura’s (1986; 1997) well-known social cognitive theory relies
in part on outcome expectancies or behavioral beliefs and, more impor-
tantly, on the construct of self-efficacy (or perceived behavioral control)
to explain behavior. In the theory of subjective culture and interpersonal
relations, Triandis (1972; 1977) includes intentions, facilitating factors,
26 Predicting and Changing Behavior
perceived consequences of performing a behavior, and perceived social
influences as important determinants of behavior. According to the health
belief model (Rosenstock, Strecher, & Becker, 1994; Strecher, Champion,
& Rosenstock, 1997), decisions to engage in health-related behaviors take
into account one’s susceptibility or perceived risk of contracting an illness,
perceptions of the severity of the illness, beliefs about the costs and ben-
efits of performing the recommended health behavior (behavioral beliefs),
as well as perceived self-efficacy in relation to the behavior. Other models
of this kind include the information-motivation-behavioral skills model
(Fisher & Fisher, 1992), the AIDS risk reduction model (Catania, Kegeles,
& Coates, 1990), and the theory of trying (Bagozzi & Warshaw, 1990). Like
our own reasoned action approach, all of these models assign a central
role to behavioral beliefs or outcome expectancies. Most models also
include variables dealing with control or self-efficacy and normative influ-
ences. Beyond these basic constructs, some models suggest consideration
of additional factors, such as habit and emotion (Triandis, 1977), knowl-
edge (Fisher & Fisher, 1992), and motivation and goal pursuit (Bagozzi
& Warshaw, 1990). We will encounter some of these additional factors in
Chapter 9. We will also try to cover recent developments in the field that
have potential implications for our approach. Among these developments
are the distinction, already alluded to, between implicit and explicit atti-
tudes; the role of mood, emotions, anticipated affect, and self-identity; the
distinction between injunctive and descriptive norms; attitudinal ambiv-
alence; framing; and a variety of other factors. These discussions address
some of the issues that have been raised in relation to our approach and
spell out our current position on these issues.
Following this introductory chapter, we begin an in-depth consider-
ation of our approach in Chapter 2 with a discussion of behavior, how it is
defined and measured, and how it can be predicted from intentions and
perceived behavioral control. Chapters 3 through 5 deal with the three
major influences on intentions: attitudes toward a behavior, perceived
norms, and perceived behavioral control, as well as with the behavioral,
normative, and control beliefs that are assumed to determine these fac-
tors. In Chapter 6 we combine all the elements in our model of behavioral
prediction and consider its empirical support.
The following two chapters deal with the role of background factors.
Chapter 7 provides a general discussion of various kinds of background
factors, including demographic characteristics and personality traits, while
Chapter 8 focuses on one particular background factor that plays a promi-
nent role in the social and behavioral sciences, namely, general attitudes
toward objects, issues, and events. In Chapter 9 we take up challenges and
issues raised by both supporters and opponents of our reasoned action
approach. Finally, in Chapters 10 and 11 we discuss the implications of
our theory for developing and evaluating behavior change interventions,
Introduction 27
and we describe a few sample interventions as illustrations. The last chap-
ter, Chapter 12, summarizes the current state of our approach and draws
out some of its implications.
Conclusion□
Ideally, a theory of human social behavior is general enough to permit us
to predict and explain various kinds of behaviors in different domains. We
have seen, however, that attempts to explain behavior often originate in
the context of a single behavioral domain and potential determinants that
are specific to that domain are identified. Not only have these attempts
met with rather mixed success, but they also have done little to advance
the development of a general theory of behavior. We have presented the
outline of our reasoned action approach that we believe provides a unify-
ing framework to account for any social behavior. At the same time, this
framework allows us to include and examine the role of domain-specific
factors that have previously been investigated or identified as possible
determinants of specific behaviors. It is our hope that application of our
theory will aid communication among investigators in different domains,
will further the accumulation of general knowledge about the determi-
nants of human behavior, and ultimately will contribute to the solution of
personal and social problems caused by human behavior.