Risk Seeking Preferences: An Investigation of Framing Effects across Decisional Domains
Renata M. Heilman, Mircea Miclea

Abstract
The framing effect refers to the fact that presenting the descriptions of equivalent decisional alternatives in different terms results in the preference for one alternative over the other, depending on the description format. Changing one's preference for a decisional outcome, depending on the wording of those outcomes, represents a violation of the principle of invariance, one of the cornerstones of the decision maker's rationality. Since previous framing-related empirical work highlighted some contradicting results regarding the existence or magnitude of risky choice framing effects, our research objective was to investigate whether framing effects are consistent between and within decision-making domains. Participants were presented with nine hypothetical decisional situations related to health, financial or nature and objects domains. The equivalent decisional alternatives were framed in either gain or loss terms. We analyzed the impact of framing on participants' level of risk seeking in the decisional situations. Our results add to the existing literature by indicating that framing effects are not consistent between decisional domains. Framing effects were present for health and nature and objects domains, but not for the financial domain. More importantly, we also found that within the same decisional domains, different problems elicit varying levels of framing effects. One possible explanation for the differences found between decisional domains might involve the emotional reaction triggered by the decisional problems.

Theoretical Framework

For several centuries, scholars in economics used the standards of the normative models in decision to evaluate the level of the decision maker's rationality. There is consensus that rational decisions should satisfy the requirement of invariance (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). According to the principle of invariance, a preference for a particular decisional option should be independent of the terms in which it is described (Tversky & Kahneman, 1986). When the options of a decisional situation are presented in different forms (i.e., frames), these different wordings should not influence the decision maker's preference for a particular alternative.

However, people lack the knowledge, skills or computational resources to make decisions consistent with the notion of economic rationality (Simon, 1955). There is compelling empirical evidence that contradicts the decision maker's absolute rationality and indicates that people are prone to various sources of distortion, which can be consistent and predictable in certain circumstances (Kahneman, 2011).

Framing Effects

The framing effect refers to the fact that presenting the descriptions of equivalent decisional alternatives in different terms reflects the preference for one alternative over the other, depending on the description format. Changing one's preference for a decisional outcome depending on the wording of those outcomes represents a violation of the principle of invariance (Kahneman, 2003). This framing effect was first demonstrated using the Asian Disease Problem (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). The Asian Disease Problem presents the decision-maker with a hypothetical situation in which a disease is expected to affect 600 people. The decision-maker has to choose which one of two possible intervention programs should be applied. The two intervention programs are described either in gain terms (how many people will be saved) or in loss terms (how many people will die). For each frame, the decision-maker is presented with a sure alternative, specifying the number of people who will surely survive/die, and a probabilistic alternative, stating the probabilities that all people should survive/die. From a mathematical point of view, the outcomes of the sure and probabilistic alternatives are equal.

Using this decisional task, the authors have shown a risk seeking preference among participants who received the problem described in terms of loss and a risk aversion tendency if the same situation was described in terms of gain (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). The wording of the decisional alternatives in terms of loss resulted in 78% of the participants choosing the probabilistic alternative, while formulating the same decisional situation in terms of gain led to the choosing of the probabilistic alternative by only 28% of the participants. The violation of the principle of invariance refers to this specific reversal of one's preferences induced by the wording of the decisional alternatives.

Taxonomy of Framing Effects

Levin and coworkers (1998) proposed a taxonomy that differentiates between three types of framing effects, each with specific consequences and underlying mechanisms:

1. Risky Choice Framing: Different formulations are applied to the results of the decisional alternatives involving varying levels of risk. This is the prototypical form of framing effects introduced by the Asian Disease Problem. In this context, participants showed preference reversal: the majority who received the positive version selected the sure outcome alternative, while participants who received the negative version mostly opted for the probabilistic alternative.

2. Attribute Framing: The characteristics of an object or event are differently formulated. This is the simplest form of framing, relevant to understanding how descriptive valence influences information processing. The different frames are applied to the attributes describing a single characteristic of an object or event, and the dependent variable is how one evaluates that specific object or event.

3. Goal Framing: The manipulation is applied to the formulation of the goals of a certain behavior or action. This type of framing is mostly investigated in communication and persuasion studies. The description can either highlight the benefits of performing the action in question or the risks if the target action is not performed.

Prospect Theory Explanation

Kahneman and Tversky turned to their Prospect Theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992) to explain framing effects. The Prospect Theory assumes that different formulations of alternatives determine the evaluation of decisional outcomes in terms of gains or losses relative to the current baseline. The concept of loss aversion refers to the fact that losses loom larger than gains, meaning that people are more sensitive to losses than to comparable gains. Considering loss aversion as characteristic to most people, negatively framed information has more impact than positive information. It is easier for a person to prefer a probabilistic option when it is framed in loss terms, because accepting a sure loss is more difficult to conceive than an uncertain outcome.

Domain Differences

Our research objective was to investigate whether framing effects are consistent between and within decision-making domains. Participants were presented with nine hypothetical decisional situations related to health, financial or nature and objects domains. The equivalent decisional alternatives were framed in either gain or loss terms. Our results indicate that framing effects are not consistent between decisional domains. Framing effects were present for health and nature and objects domains, but not for the financial domain. Moreover, within the same decisional domains, different problems elicit varying levels of framing effects. One possible explanation for the differences found between decisional domains might involve the emotional reaction triggered by the decisional problems.