Socio-Semantic Networks
Nikita Basov1 (0000-0003-3630-6119) and Camille Roth2,3,4 (0000-0003-3925-7957) ∗
1University of Manchester, UK
2CNRS, France
3Computational Social Science team, Centre Marc Bloch (CNRS/HU), Berlin, Germany
4Centre d’Analyse et de Mathématique Sociales (CNRS/EHESS), Paris, France
in ‘Handbook of Social Network Analysis and Culture’, ed. by Nick Crossley and Paul Widdop
Introduction
Recent revitalization of ‘networks and culture’ studies is closely connected with the emergence of a new an-
alytical framework and the corresponding interdisciplinary research area: socio-semantic network analysis
(Roth and Cointet, 2010; Basov, Breiger, and Hellsten, 2020). It relies on explicit linking of social relationships
(e.g., collaboration, advice, or friendship) and semantic associations (e.g., co-definitions or similarities be-
tween words, notions, or ideas). Socio-semantic network analysis offers conceptual perspectives and meth-
ods to structurally unfold and explain the – traditionally implicit and interpretively addressed – relation
between collectivity and meaning. It does so by directly observing the interplay between social structures
of groups (e.g., organizations, communities, movements) and semantic structures of culture (e.g., discourses,
knowledge, tastes), rather than indirectly implying the laer in the former, or vice versa. As such, this an-
alytical perspective strives to make a crucial step in understanding society, where social relationships and
semantic associations alike are ontologically defined by their relative structural positions both within and
across the two realms: Social relationships between actors (e.g., through interaction) give meaning to seman-
tic associations with regard to the social context in which these relationships are embedded and semantic
associations constitute the meaning of social relationships (e.g., ‘we are friends’) against the background of
other semantic associations which they elaborate on or distinguish from (White, 1992; Godart and White,
2010). Since social and semantic relations are co-constitutive they can only be fully understood together
(Mohr and Duquenne, 1997). For some authors, they are even joint and second-order manifestations of a
“deeper set of forces, namely identity and control” (Breiger, 2010, referring to White and Godart [2007])
Socio-semantic network analysis is, thus, concerned with the duality of (1) semantic systems underlying
opinions, views, values, schemata, perspectives, frames, or ideas and (2) systems of social relationships to
which they correspond and to the participants of which they constitute a given reality. Scholars of socio-
semantic networks aim to reveal network-level relations between these systems as well as the specific mech-
anisms of socio-semantic bundling through which the duality of the social and the semantic operates. It
sheds light on co-dependencies between similarity in expressions and dyadic friendships, paerns of collab-
oration and co-creation of ideas, discursive struggle and differences in social network positions. Research
contexts range from global scientific fields to artistic communes, from contemporary online social media -
to medieval politics.
Synthetic by birth, socio-semantic network analysis thrives on the combination of its two fundamental
pillars: structure and content. As such, it inherits their customary syntheses, especially of quantitative and
qualitative methods, of ‘Big’ and ‘thick’ data, of micro and macro analytical levels. Being such a crossroad,
socio-semantic network analysis is a point of joint growth for multiple disciplines aiming to understand the
co-constitution of the social and the semantic.
The remainder of this chapter outlines the story behind the socio-semantic framework, the possibilities
it opens, the challenges it struggles with, and its prospects.
∗Both authors contributed equally. Correspondance: nikita.basov@manchester.ac.uk and camille.roth@cnrs.fr
1
1 The Past: Origination of socio-semantic network analysis
Semantic networks. The becoming of the socio-semantic framework consists in a gradual drift of its
two constituent components towards each other. On the side of semantic network analysis, rooted in psy-
cholinguistics (Raphael, 1964; illian, 1968; Johnson-Laird, Herrmann Jr., and Chaffin, 1984) and structural
linguistics (Harris, 1963; Saussure, [1916] 1959), the related movement was from positions in structures of co-
definition between words towards appreciation of the social contexts in which these chains of co-definition
make sense, in a sociolinguistic stream of thinking (Wigenstein, 1953; Labov, 1972). Further reinforced by
the evidence on idiomatic expressions in corpus linguistics, such as in the work of Sinclair (1991), the idea of
semantic networks as associated with particular social seings became persistent. Similarly, actor-network
theory (Callon and Latour, 1981) proposed an approach accommodating interactions between human and
non-human actors, emphasizing in particular how word associations could account for semantic (semiotic)
connections, between ideas as well as between ideas and actors.
Studies of science and technology, and more specifically scientometrics, were among the first research
areas to develop a massive effort for the quantitative mapping of semantic networks in social systems. One
technique to do so was the mapping of co-occurring words or references in large bibliographic corpora (Mc-
Cain, 1986; Leydesdorff, 1989; Callon, Courtial, and Laville, 1991) that ultimately aimed at describing the
relative arrangement of scientific subfields as clusters of semantic links automatically extracted from tex-
tual data. Leydesdorff (e.g., 1997), further, focused on the relation between social actors in communication
and discourse, and on meanings as continuously re-created at different levels of social actors. He has de-
veloped the ideas underlying actor-network theory to apply to large-scale data sets, shifting the focus from
qualitative case studies to a quantitative system-level approach (e.g., Leydesdorff, 2001), while proposing
automated tools for mapping word co-occurrences in the context of specific societal issues (e.g., Leydes-
dorff and Hellsten, 2005; Hellsten, Dawson, and Leydesdorff, 2010) or geing closer to actor-network theory
by gathering co-occurring hashtags and addressed actors in social media data within the same semantic
network (Hellsten and Leydesdorff, 2020).
Subsequent decades witnessed a rapid growth in the amount of accessible cultural data, especially in
online communication, even though such data were largely decontextualized, hence departing further from
the ethnographic perspective of scholars close to actor-network theory. This led to a burgeoning of semantic
network analyses in communication science (Corman et al., 2002; Nerghes et al., 2015; Kwon et al., 2016; Vel-
tri and Atanasova, 2017), which already had the tradition of associating semantic networks with particular
social groups (Danowski, 1982; Doerfel, 1998; Doerfel and Barne, 1999). Simultaneously, rapid progress on
semantic networks, especially of word associations, was made in adjacent fields and at the interface with
computational linguistics, including in cognitive science (Steyvers and Tenenbaum, 2005; Austerweil, Abbo,
and Griffiths, 2012; Nelson et al., 2013; Lerique and Roth, 2018), political science (Van Aeveldt, Kleinnijen-
huis, and Ruigrok, 2008; S. Yang and González-Bailón, 2018) as well as complex systems (Borge-Holthoefer
and Arenas, 2010; Teixeira et al., 2010). On the whole, researchers derived relations between words from
various types of textual data and proposed natural language processing extensions, such as syntax-based
approaches to enhancing word associations with information about parts of speech, grammatical relations
between words, and ontologies (Jäschke et al., 2008; Evans and Aceves, 2016; Stuhler, 2021) to map a range of
co-occurring constructs in news articles, political discourses, and, increasingly often, online ‘Big’ data (Rule,
Cointet, and Bearman, 2015; Sudhahar, Veltri, and Cristianini, 2015; Hellsten, Jacobs, and Wonneberger,
2019).
Progressing in automated text data mining and analysis (Srivastava and Sahami, 2009; Grimmer and
Stewart, 2013; Wilkerson and Casas, 2017), this stream of studies often focuses on online data and frequently
abstracts from social contexts, as pinpointed by its internal critics (Bail, 2014). The junction of computational
automated analyses of large-scale data and of in-depth contextual analyses utilizing ethnographic data
was achieved in sociology. There, the interest in semantic networks in the 1990s brought together the
perspectives and techniques of communication science, cognitive science and sociolinguistics in a movement
known as formal analysis of culture. Led by John Mohr (Mohr, 1994, 1998, 2000; Kirchner and Mohr, 2010),
this movement is largely responsible for the growing popularity of semantic network analysis in sociology
2
nowadays (Hoffman et al., 2018; Kozlowski, Taddy, and Evans, 2019). Formal analysts approach culture as
“relations between rather individual elements and the paerns arising in these” (Edelmann and Mohr, 2018).
They aim at theorizing cultural mechanisms and applying formal methods to cultural data in search of the
corresponding cultural paerns.
One of the major contributions to this movement, apart from John Mohr’s own works, is to be found in
the ‘quantitative narrative analysis’ of Roberto Franzosi (1999, 2004, 2010), whose methodological project
created a profound basis for enhancement of word collocation semantic network analysis with syntax-based
techniques. Alternative, yet also essentially mixed-method-based network analyses of culture in sociology
have notably been developed by the teams of Peter Bearman and John Padge (McLean, 1998; Bearman
and Stovel, 2000; McLean, 2007; Padge, 2018). A recent step in taking advantage of the combination of
computer-analytical techniques and qualitative interpretation in formal analysis of culture is ‘computational
hermeneutics’ puing together machine-performed ‘distant reading’ of text and human ‘close reading’, a
combination that enables understanding of cultural statistical regularities in their social contexts (Mohr,
Wagner-Pacifici, Breiger, and Bogdanov, 2013; Mohr, Wagner-Pacifici, and Breiger, 2015; Breiger, Wagner-
Pacifici, and Mohr, 2018).
Elements of convergence of social and semantic networks. Notwithstanding these developments
in the analysis of cultural structure, the point of convergence of social and semantic networks lies at the
junction of formal analysis of meanings and social network analysis. This, however, was not straightfor-
ward. Traditionally, social network research has purposively bracketed culture for the sake of focusing on
the structures of relations among social actors (Barnes, 1954; White, Boorman, and Breiger, 1976; Wellman,
1988; Wellman and Berkowitz, 1988). Cultural sociology appears to have given the key impulse for the con-
vergence in the study of structure and culture. Already in the 1990s, calls to jointly study both realms could
build upon a wealth of pioneering intuitions and works revolving around three main ideas: the critique of a
strict social structuralism, the dependence of networks on meaning, and the need to introduce the cultural
level directly into social network analysis. Sewell (1992) recalls how sociology and, more precisely, a large
part of social network analysis typically diverge from anthropology in the interpretation of what counts
primarily as “structure”. For the former, the “material” (or interactional) realm prevails over the “mental”
(or cultural) realm, which is thus secondary. The opposite holds for the laer. In effect, social network anal-
ysis has a long history of recovering social order from the network structure exclusively rather than using
preexisting social or semantic categories, even if typical node paerns such as structural equivalence (Lor-
rain and White, 1971) have more to do with meaning than cohesion, and even though early social network
analyses could mobilize cultural features in their depictions (see Fuhse, 2009). Assuming the primacy of
structure over culture or, more concretely, of relations over “categories” (in the broad sense) may have led to
overlook or at least to neglect the crucial contribution of the cultural and semiotic dimensions to the forma-
tion of structure (Emirbayer and Goodwin, 1994). Cultural sociology forcefully rejected a strong structural
viewpoint whereby networks alone would somehow reveal enough about the constraints that apply to indi-
viduals, while the study of motives, beliefs and identities should be left to other fields, be it anthropology or
psychology (see Vaisey and Lizardo, 2010). Instead, it underlined how social networks depend on identities,
contexts, meanings (White, 1992; Pachucki and Breiger, 2010), to the point that each interaction context
could configure a different network, echoing the earlier notion of “multi-purpose ties” introduced by Fine
and Kleinman (1983) and the later conflict-based actor networks of Tilly (1997).
In a way, culture had to be ‘smuggled’ (Emirbayer and Goodwin, 1994) into network analysis by a range
of network and culture studies (for overviews, see Pachucki and Breiger, 2010; Fuhse, 2015a). These studies
empirically tested theories related to specific network mechanisms affecting culture, such as transmission
(Erickson, 1982; Krackhardt and Kilduff, 1990; Mark, 1998; Krackhardt and Kilduff, 2002), proximity (Rice and
Aydin, 1991; Rice, 1993; Meyer, 1994), or socialization (Kandel, 1978). These and similar theories argue that
social ties enable exchange with cultural elements — pieces of information, preferences, aitudes, choices,
or aributions — which condition similarities in individuals’ cognitive systems, perspectives, and tastes,
combining these elements (Carley, 1986; DiMaggio, 1987; Erickson, 1988; Kilduff, 1990; Mark, 1998). While
the main focus was on culture associated with dyadic relationships between social actors (Krackhardt and
3
Kilduff, 1990; Rice and Aydin, 1991) researchers have also been increasingly going beyond the dyadic level
(see Krackhardt and Kilduff, 2002; Basov and Brennecke, 2017).
Kathleen Carley was, perhaps, the one who triggered change in the aitude of social network analysts
to culture. Her offer was to treat not only the social but also the cultural realm structurally, and to apply so-
cial network analysis techniques to semantic networks of culture (Carley, 1994, 1997). Her pioneering work
(Carley, 1986) introduced a framework that precisely comprised all the building blocks required to jointly
appraise the social and the semantic structure: first by defining them separately, then by connecting them.
Her work was seled in the context of collective decision-making: a social cognitive process where the anal-
ysis of facts by individuals heavily depends on social structure, locally and collectively. Social structure takes
the typical form of a social network whose clusters are block-modeled (White, Boorman, and Breiger, 1976),
semantic structure is figured by concept maps i.e., semantic networks. Typical social network analysis mea-
sures such as centrality and transitivity are computed on both networks, while actor-centric concept maps
may be studied and compared for groups of actors, which achieves the hybridation of connections of all
types — social, semantic, and socio-semantic. Carley and her team further applied social network measures
to semantic networks (Carley and Kaufer, 1993), intersected semantic networks to represent group culture
(Carley, 1997), and extracted social networks from texts (Carley, Diesner, et al., 2007; Diesner, 2013). More-
over, she and colleagues created software for (semi-)automated mapping, intuitive visualization and analysis
of semantic networks: ‘AutoMap’ and ‘ORA’ (Diesner and Carley, 2011; Pfeffer and Carley, 2013). Concep-
tually Carley (1991), Carley proposed a ‘constructural theory’ of networks and culture interplay, which still
inspires researchers decades after (Lizardo, 2006; Breiger and Puetz, 2015). Classical social network analysis
methods were further applied to cultural connections, such as blockmodeling to co-occurrences of semantic
categories (Mohr, 1994; Tilly, 1997), and led to the emergence of hybrid notions, like ‘cultural holes’ or ‘weak
cultural ties’ (Pachucki and Breiger, 2010; Schultz and Breiger, 2010; Lizardo, 2014).
Towards a symmetric appraisal. Foundational as they were, most of the earlier networks and culture
studies treated culture as secondary, would it be disconnected elements that travel through social networks
or aributes of actors. Subjected to multiple criticisms (e.g., Brint, 1992; Emirbayer and Goodwin, 1994),
networks scholars gradually started looking into the inverse effect of cultural meanings on social networks
(Mark, 1998; Lizardo, 2006; Boero, 2009; Vaisey and Lizardo, 2010; Boero and Crossley, 2011; Lewis and
Kaufman, 2018). This movement, led by one of the founding fathers of the contemporary social network anal-
ysis, Harrison White, resonated with the cultural turn in social sciences overall (Alexander and Smith, 1993;
Alexander, 2003; Friedland and Mohr, 2004). White built his relational sociology on the premise that net-
works and culture are naturally intertwined as actors seek sensible footing in the social space (White, 1992;
Emirbayer, 1997; Kirchner and Mohr, 2010; Mische, 2011; Fuhse, 2015b), which makes networks ’culturally
constituted’ (Mische, 2003). Therefore, understanding of social networks and cultural processes underlying
them are to be part of the same project (Mische and White, 1998; Fuhse and Mützel, 2011). White’s notion
of netdom (White, 1992; Godart and White, 2010) – a term which stands for “social networks” and “semiotic
domains” denotes a cultural domain and a social network corresponding to it – concluded the synthesis.
Netdoms crucially rely on the concept of “stories”, construed as sets of semantic relationships which may
precede actual interactions.
As Carley – a PhD student of White – approached also the cultural realm structurally, and White’s
notion of netdom explicitly brought the two realms together, the idea of cultural and social duality was
locked (Mohr and Duquenne, 1997; Breiger, 2000), aligned with one of the main fundamental dualities of
social sciences (Mead, 1934; Berger and Luckmann, 1966; Bourdieu, 1985; Mohr and Neely, 2009). The
corresponding perspective treats culture as a system of meaningful associations between cultural elements,
a system ’objective’ to any subset of actors in the social network associated with it, and as such, distinct
and self-consistent, having an ‘equal weight’ to social structure (Mohr, 2000). Social and cultural structures
started being explicitly put together (Mohr, 1998). For instance, it was shown that social institutions classify
individuals into groups, assign them similar identities, and impose corresponding meanings on them (Mohr
and H. K. Lee, 2000; Jancsary et al., 2017).
On the whole, cultural sociology has developed formal frameworks that connect, to some extent, so-
4
cial and semantic networks, or semantics with social networks, or semantic networks with actors (beyond
the above-mentioned works, see also Leenders, 1997; Lazega and Paison, 1999; Snijders, Steglich, and
Schweinberger, 2007; Godart and White, 2010; P. Wang et al., 2013). Few works pushed the generalization
of connection types much further than Krackhardt and Carley (1998) who introduced networks between
several kinds of entities (actors, resources, tasks, skills) and their various potential projections, denoted as
“meta network” in Carley (2002) and leading to a further operationalization in Diesner and Carley (2005)
where a myriad of, inter alia, actor-actor, actor-concept, concept-concept relationships are extracted from
text corpuses. Nevertheless, this was not yet juxtaposing of social and cultural structures.
The first to propose socio-semantic network analysis was Camille Roth (Roth and Bourgine, 2003; Roth,
2006, 2007), with clear connections with two-mode (Breiger, 1974) and even three-mode (Fararo and Doreian,
1984) approaches initially concerned with group affiliations, that opened a path to direct representation
of relations between social and cultural structures. Modeling joint evolution of semantic communication
networks in scientific communities and in social media, Roth and coauthors revealed stable paerns of this
co-evolution, associated with centralization, clustering and transitivity, and contraction and diversification
(see Roth, 2006; Roth and Cointet, 2010; Roth, 2013). Along a similar line of reasoning, Taramasco, Cointet,
and Roth (2010) appraised the joint social and semantic novelty of teams involved in collaborative articles
using a mixed approach considering hybrid groups of authors and concepts. These developments were met
with interest by social network analysts, who started puing together social and semantic networks, and
the relations between the two (Shi, Foster, and Evans, 2015).
Notwithstanding, a few adjacent fields had also explicitly coined notions and expressions combining
‘social’ and ‘semantic’. Such is obviously the case of the socio-semantic web or social semantic web (Zacklad,
Cahier, and Pétard, 2003; S. Wang and Groth, 2010), aimed at integrating social aspects into the so-called
‘semantic web’ — an engineering field, already thriving in the early 2000s, focused on ontologies and the
conception of specifications and protocols to deal with relationships between various types of entities. The
socio-semantic web intended to augment semantic web ontologies with a social layer, and the social web
(i.e., essentially ontologies of people) with a semantic layer, in order to improve the cooperative manage-
ment of ontologies and to foster the emergence of knowledge-oriented user groups. While some ontologies
connected almost indifferently actors and concepts in all directions (e.g., ‘FOAF’, Friend Of A Friend, Finin
et al., 2005), by contrast, semantic-social networks (Mika, 2007) extended classical ontologies by adding the
notion that meaning depends on actors and by specifying which actor is behind which ontological relation-
ship. Such tripartite actor-concept-instance graphs resemble very much both social tagging systems and
the precursor cognitive social structures proposed by Krackhardt (1987): the resulting macro-level structure
is essentially a knowledge map whose implicit connectors are agents or, more precisely, their beliefs on
concepts.
Hybrid networks of actors and concepts, featuring in all generality hybrid interactional and semantic
relationships, were increasingly introduced around the turn of the 2010s. They were variously denoted as
semantic social networks (Gloor et al., 2009), aribute-augmented graphs (Zhou, Cheng, and Yu, 2009), bi-type
information networks (Sun et al., 2009), content-based social networks (Cucchiarelli, D’Antonio, and Velardi,
2010), social content networks (S. Wang and Groth, 2010), augmented social networks (Cruz, Bothorel, and
Poulet, 2013), or heterogeneous graphs (Liu et al., 2017), to cite a few. These works typically involve both
social and semantic nodes, and describe links and clusters of interest in a unified representation. This also
relates to a longer effort in the information visualization community to propose hybrid social and semantic
representations, starting with Sack (2003) who put side by side semantic and social networks (term rela-
tionships and user replies), responding to the short yet much older call of Dourish and Chalmers (1994) to
do so. Hybrid visualizations have since become much more familiar, including pivot graphs (Waenberg,
2006), where node placement is influenced by aributes, pivot paths (Dörk et al., 2012), which alternates
between actor- and concept-centric navigation. Various types of projections of social graphs on semantic
maps (Korff, Oberg, and Powell, 2015) or the other way around (Gaumont, Panahi, and Chavalarias, 2018)
are now rather common.
5
2 The Present: Strengths of socio-semantic network analysis
The present of socio-semantic network analysis starts, perhaps, with its rapid expansion when a group of
researchers took up Roth’s perspective to relate construction of culture to social network positions (Basov,
J.-S. Lee, and Antoniuk, 2017), to approach meanings as paerns that simultaneously include semantic as-
sociations and social relationships (Basov, Nooy, and Nenko, [2018] 2021), and to examine relation between
social network ties and discoursive similarities (Saint-Charles and Mongeau, 2018). Aracting aention to
socio-semantic approach among social networks scholars, this triggered several strands of socio-semantic
network analysis that today co-exist and enrich each other both methodologically and substantially, while
developing their own styles of research, specific approaches, and combinations of analytical techniques
(Basov, Breiger, and Hellsten, 2020).
With respect to the type of empirical material, one fast-growing strand utilizes social media data for
(semi-) automated reconstruction of social and semantic networks (Baltzer, Karsai, and Roth, 2019; Hell-
sten, Jacobs, and Wonneberger, 2019; Hellsten and Leydesdorff, 2020; Radicioni et al., 2021). This allows for
socio-semantic analysis of ‘Big’ data using computational methods. Another strand focuses on scientific
communities. For instance, Deichmann et al. (2020) examine how socio-semantic connectivity of ideas and
research teams facilitates diffusion of ideas in academic conference publications. Within this strand lay also
hybrid approaches to visualization of socio-semantic data (such as Roth and Basov, 2020), still rather rare
in the literature. Yet another strand utilizes archival epistolary data subjected to computational network
analysis and in-depth interpretation which, again, allows not only to explain relations between cultural
similarity and social closeness but also to interpret them contextually (M. Lee, 2017). Going beyond purely
text-based analysis and examining dynamics of word associations in records of debates, supplemented with
statistical and qualitative analyses of social actors’ similarities in speeches, archival socio-semantic schol-
ars manage to infer co-evolution of social and semantic structures over years (Fuhse, Stuhler, et al., 2020;
Padge, Prajda, et al., 2020; Padge, Schoots, et al., 2020).
A distinct direction of socio-semantic investigation looks into small-group interactions. In doing so, it
contributes to the growing mixed method movement in networks and culture studies (Fuhse and Mützel,
2011; Belloi, 2014; Ibrahim and Crossley, 2016). This enables shedding light on the non-trivial correlation
between semantic similarity to other group members and social network centrality, positive only up to a
threshold point after which the relation inverts (Saint-Charles and Mongeau, 2018).
Socio-semantic analysis of small groups also allows for conceptual advances in ’networks and culture’
thinking. Unlike highly regulated meaning structures imposed by institutions, small group cultures are far
less regulated and context-specific, and hence researcher categorization – would it be a priori (formulation
of survey questions) or a posteriori (coding) – is not fair to the data (for an extensive discussion see M. Lee
and Martin, 2015). Motivated by the observation that categorization on the researcher’s side is not suitable
for studying emergence of meaning in practice-driven interaction, Basov, Nooy, and Nenko ([2018] 2021)
propose inductive mapping of socio-semantic paerns, where associations between words are affiliated with
social network ties between the individuals who use these associations, thus – in contrast to topic or co-
word models (see Leydesdorff, 1997; Bail, 2014) – puing forward an account of meaning that does justice
to its contextual embeddedness in practice and interaction.
Exploring the meaningful ways in which social network measures can be applied to semantic networks
remains an important methodological direction, especially around the combination of two social network
centrality measures: betweenness centrality as a measure of concept connectivity, and degree centrality as
an indication of concept popularity (Godart and Galunic, 2019; Deichmann et al., 2020). Computationally
finding central concepts and frequent associations shared in a certain group signals where to look for the
focal meaning structures of that group and allows for distinguishing a certain group from others. This allows
for finding stable paerns evading human eye when closely examining ethnographic data. However, only the
combination of computational and qualitative analyses secures understanding (Verstehen) of these meaning
structures in their practical contexts (Basov, Nooy, and Nenko, [2018] 2021). With a socio-semantic network
approach, paerns of links between words and individuals can be related to ethnographic data on verbal
expressions and interactions. Among other things, this enables relating socio-semantic micro structures
6
of small groups driven by practice to socio-semantic macro structures, such as those of social fields, to
reveal how practice contests macro-scale social forces, literally, between the lines, at the very basic level
of concept associations statistically occurring throughout practical contexts but not visible when merely
reading interview transcripts or wrien texts (Basov, 2020; Basov, Nooy, and Nenko, [2018] 2021).
A corresponding – and largely intertwining – methodological strand is the usage of statistical model-
ing of socio-semantic networks in multilayer frameworks (multiplex and multilevel included), which make it
possible to characterize hybrid paerns made of different types of links that bear different meanings (Lazega
and Paison, 1999; Lazega, Jourda, et al., 2008; P. Wang et al., 2013). They enable tests for interdependencies
between social and semantic networks in ways compatible with the social and cultural duality perspective.
Particularly aractive is identifying the fundamental principles and mechanisms of co-evolution of social
and cultural structures as interplaying and mutually affecting – as soon as the paerns corresponding to
these principles and mechanisms are conceptualized (Basov and Brennecke, 2017). Most recent multilayer
extensions combine computational text analysis and statistical network analysis, such as stochastic actor-
oriented models with topic modelling (Karell and Freedman, 2020) and exponential random graph modelling
– with word collocation networks (Basov, 2020). These extensions enable shedding light on the principles
underlying dynamic relations between social and semantic structures. Importantly, the authors map net-
works using mixtures of qualitative and quantitative data, thus both accounting for interpretive context
and statistical explanation. Mixed statistical and qualitative analyses inform each other and enable insights
impossible for either of these separately.
Socio-semantic network analysis not only benefits from multilayer statistical network modelling tech-
niques, but also stimulates their development in return. Puing forward new multilayer network configura-
tions driven by its conceptual developments, it poses new modelling challenges, which results in modelling
extensions and even new modelling frameworks, such as ’networks of networks’ (Koskinen et al., 2020).
Extensions of socio-semantic dimensionality within a single matrix (Hellsten, Opthof, and Leydesdorff,
2020) constitute one more direction in the methodological development of socio-semantic network analysis.
This line of work addresses calls for hybrid methods in science and technology studies (Janssens, Glänzel,
and De Moor, 2008; Glänzel and Thijs, 2017), such as in actor-network theory taking into account different
types of agencies by different types of actors. Socio-semantic network analysis also recently appeared to
be highly scalable. Using state-of-the-art computational methods for automated reconstruction of both
social and semantic networks, it is possible to explore how global cultural properties co-constitute with
characteristics of global social network structures connecting millions of nodes (Li, Wu, and Evans, 2020).
Socio-semantic hypergraphs, introduced as epistemic hypergraphs in Taramasco, Cointet, and Roth (2010),
are at the junction between socio-semantic networks and hypergraphs, a generalization of graphs currently
raising substantial interest in the network analysis community. They versatilely accommodate most of the
operational socio-semantic frameworks of the literature reviewed hitherto (Roth, 2021). This formalism
also distinguishes social and semantic nodes, yet it configures a single type of n-adic relation over the
hybrid set of all nodes, social or semantic. Most digraphs used to empirically connect social and semantic
structures may be construed as some restriction of this n-adic relation. Trivially, restricting it to social (resp.
semantic) dyadic relations configures a classical binary social (resp. semantic) network. Socio-semantic
relationships between social and semantic entities may be defined as the intersection of this relation with
the cross product of social and semantic node sets, while projected social networks and traditional co-
affiliation networks may be defined analogously using simple conditions. Socio-semantic hypergraphs cover
many other usual and hybrid uses, including when distinct actors ascribing different semantic relationships
between terms, or different meanings (Fuhse, 2009; Medeuov et al., 2021). It enables the definition of multi-
actor-multi-concept paerns, and the comparison between actors of their respective semantic networks.
Socio-semantic “diamonds” (Roth and Cointet, 2010) describing the joint use by a couple of actors of a
couple of concepts are also easily expressable. These hybrid paerns are currently at the root of a burgeoning
literature building in part upon the above socio-semantic formalisms (see e.g., Basov, Breiger, and Hellsten,
2020; Fuhse, Stuhler, et al., 2020; Basov, Nooy, and Nenko, [2018] 2021).
7
3 The Future: Challenges and prospects for socio-semantic network anal-
ysis
While making a significant step forward, socio-semantic scholarship is not free from a range of problems
and tasks for future investigations. Some of these are rooted in the ‘original sin’ of the socio-semantic
junction. A first challenge consists in the fundamental asymmetry in the burden of defining what counts
as an entity in each realm. On the social side, it appears considerably easier, if not straightforward in some
contexts, than on the semantic side. Social nodes typically represent individuals (such as authors, users),
rarely collective entities (such as organizations, websites) whose boundaries are admiedly less well-defined.
Semantic nodes and, thus, semantic categories, pose significantly more definitional questions, especially as
they are often abstracted from text corpora (Evans and Aceves, 2016), be it interview transcripts or digital
publications. Shall we focus on words, n-grams, or terms? This goes further than mere technical processing
issues since meaning of semantic nodes across different contexts and/or different pieces of expression is not
obviously stable (Leydesdorff, 1997). Even if we dismiss this problem, shall we use terms, or “topics” as term
sets or distributions (Grimmer and Stewart, 2013)? “Statements” or “clauses” as syntactically articulated
terms (Mausam et al., 2012; Vossen et al., 2016; Van Aeveldt, Sheafer, et al., 2017)? Whole “sentences”
as syntactically consistent units (Leskovec, Backstrom, and Kleinberg, 2009)? Vectors in some opinion or
epistemic space (Gilbert, 1997; Sim et al., 2013)? Vector models (Salton, Wong, and C. S. Yang, 1975) up to
the most recent machine learning approaches aimed at geometrically embeddinging words, sentences or
documents, or both (Mikolov et al., 2013; Le and Mikolov, 2014; Kozlowski, Taddy, and Evans, 2019; Angelov,
2020, which, to some extent, take implicitly into account an underlying relational and contextual structure)?
Answers and decisions considerably vary across the state of the art.
Defining links across the two realms is not easier. On the social side, they are admiedly an abstraction
of reality, all the more when the same data induce various types of relationships (affiliation vs. interaction;
retweets vs. mentions, see Conover et al., 2011; Lietz et al., 2014) or layers (Kivelä et al., 2014). The same goes
with the aribution of weights to edges, or arcs, and why. Such discussions nevertheless remain generally
short: binarization is very frequent and weights oftentimes correspond to interaction frequency, whatever
the interaction. On the semantic side, the meaning of links is relatively straightforward when nodes are
terms (whereby co-occurrence frequency is a consensual choice), yet much less otherwise: a myriad of
similarity metrics are available (Jaccard, cosine, edit distances in some space) to express the relatedness of
words, sentences or documents. Last but not least, there is no less freedom for defining connections between
social and semantic entities and most of these issues remain equally acute.
Furthermore, the measures developed for social networks are often applied to semantic networks, which
they are not necessarily applicable to. For one, betweenness centrality makes lile sense for semantic net-
works, as being on the shortest paths of information or resource flows is irrelevant to them, constituted
by relations of meaning. At the same time, reflection about the same measures across social and semantic
planes may be fruitful. For example, having high degree centrality (i.e., having many relations of meaning
to other semantic nodes), the focal node is often considered to be rich in meaning. However, this may also
indicate that it fits any context, which signals triviality. if these are predominantly strong ties, in contrast
to weak, far-reaching ties. Where is the ’triviality threshold’ for semantic node degree and how does it re-
late to the proportion of strong and weak semantic associations (representing weak culture, see Schultz and
Breiger, 2010))? Could the loss of originality, like in social networks, happen through contagion mechanisms,
when associated semantic nodes grow similar in meaning? Or may homophily be involved? In either case,
for semantic networks these considerations would imply looking at embeddings, the network surroundings
of semantic nodes that constitute their meanings more directly than alters of actors - their originality (or
the lack of it). Can we, the other way around, think of an actor having social ties to many others as prone
to becoming less innovative because their perspective does not contradict others too often? The operation
of disentangling and re-entangling social and semantic realms may bring new conceptual ideas. It is clear
that measures should not be blindly applied across the two realms, but only after careful conceptual consid-
eration. The same goes for network mechanisms. For instance, semantic nodes are not socially pressed to
reciprocate directed connections. Neither they are pressed to connect because of having alters in common
8
and therefore having greater chances of meeting and liking each other.
Meanwhile, the mechanisms of co-evolution of social and semantic networks offer a whole new ground
to cover. Correspondingly, socio-semantic paerns are to be proposed, would these rely on multilayer, mul-
tilevel, multiplex or new forms of representation – to empirically investigate sociocultural dynamics (Basov,
2020; Karell and Freedman, 2020; Koskinen et al., 2020). To some extent these developments can rely on
the mechanisms and paerns known from social networks (such as multiplex triadic closure or two-level
tetradic closure).
A related challenge consists in linking of local and global dynamics of socio-semantic networks. Partic-
ularly for semantic networks the need to account for structures beyond dyads, triads, and tetrads is visible,
since the meaning of alters of a given semantic node is further constituted by a circle of alters to the first
alters - and so on, vast structures of definition are relevant to any given node, as is the case with semantic
hypergraphs (Menezes and Roth, 2019). Nevertheless, such non-local notions as ‘path’ or ‘flow’ are rele-
vant to social networks. These, however, are not accounted by the approaches focused on micro-paerns.
Socio-semantic scholarship implies development of such accounts. Furthermore, network mechanisms and
paerns, would these be local or global, are yet to be linked to the macro structures of society (social fields,
classes, and strata). The work in this direction has already started both in socio-semantic scholarship and
in related areas (Rawlings and Childress, 2019; Basov, 2020). A challenging task here is accounting not
only for layering of socio-semantic structures, but also nesting of small-scale paerns into large-scale pat-
terns, e.g., of individuals and words in organizations and themes. When formulated in terms of meso-level
structures –namely asking which social groups are semantically homogeneous, or not, and vice versa– this
question remains significantly unexplored in the literature, at least in empirical studies i.e., beyond works
proposing normative models that connect micro-level processes with the existence of specific macro-level
configurations (Roth, 2022). For instance, social clusters may indeed cover a variety of semantic clusters,
while semantic clusters may spread over many social clusters, which indicates that there is a myriad of
possible meta-structural arrangements between social and semantic communities (as demonstrated in spe-
cific situations, see Ding, 2011; Garimella et al., 2016). For the moment, the diversity of the structure of
socio-semantic structures remains largely unknown, both at the meso and the macro levels. Socio-semantic
scholarship should endeavor at examining and classifying social systems in terms of whether they exhibit
more or less aligned social & semantic clusters, from core-periphery systems (a socio-semantic core commu-
nity, and various peripheries) to polycentric systems (many socio-semantic communities), and any variation
in between.
Like almost any network analysis relying on the cases of observed network structure, socio-semantic
scholarship struggles with limitations in generalizability and comparability. These limitations are even
greater than in other network analyses, given the contextual nature of meaning and of its dual relation
with social structure. Similarly to social network analysis, focusing on the network-generating mechanisms
and the corresponding paerns could be a solution. However, in the case of socio-semantic mechanisms
and paerns, when affiliation even of the same concept with different types of social ties and cultural con-
texts may yield completely different meanings, maintaining connections to the background is particularly
important. Variations in the arbitrary choices in the procedures used to map semantic associations further
complicate the maer. One solution could consist in keeping track of the categories of ties and cultural
contexts associated with a mechanism/paern. Another, non-exclusive solution, could reside in registering
differences in the procedural parameters used to map semantic associations (such as, for instance, different
collocation window sizes or part-of-speech filtering in subject-verb-object triplet extraction approaches).
Mixed methods supplementing computational techniques with ethnographic ones (at least selectively) dur-
ing cross-case comparisons or data aggregations could be the means to secure proper interpretation of the
structural similarities found across cases. This does not exclude the efforts on mapping socio-semantic land-
scapes as a whole (Li, Wu, and Evans, 2020). However, such efforts are to be pillared in qualitative in-depth
inquiries (Bail, 2014; Basov and Kholodova, 2022). A related issue is balancing of the rapidly growing body of
big online data by broadening the collection of ethnographic socio-semantic data on (particularly, real-time)
in-presence interaction. The complexity of socio-semantic framework makes such in-depth dynamic data -
not easy to collect in themselves - precious for the field.
9
