Risk Seeking Preferences: An Investigation of Framing Effects across Decisional Domains
Renata M. Heilman1*, Mircea Miclea1,2
1Department of Psychology, Babeș-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania
2Cognitrom Ltd., Cluj-Napoca, Romania
*Corresponding author:
E-mail: renataheilman@psychology.ro
37 Republicii Street, 400015
Cluj-Napoca, Romania
2
Abstract
The framing effect refers to the fact that presenting the descriptions of equivalent decisional
alternatives in different terms results in the preference for one alternative over the other,
depending on the description format. Changing one’s preference for a decisional outcome,
depending on the wording of those outcomes, represents a violation of the principle of
invariance, one of the cornerstones of the decision maker’s rationality. Since previous framing-
related empirical work highlighted some contradicting results regarding the existence or
magnitude of risky choice framing effects, our research objective was to investigate whether
framing effects are consistent between and within decision-making domains. Participants were
presented with nine hypothetical decisional situations related to health, financial or nature and
objects domains. The equivalent decisional alternatives were framed in either gain or loss terms.
We analyzed the impact of framing on participants’ level of risk seeking in the decisional
situations. Our results add to the existing literature by indicating that framing effects are not
consistent between decisional domains. Framing effects were present for health and nature and
objects domains, but not for the financial domain. More importantly, we also found that within
the same decisional domains, different problems elicit varying levels of framing effects. One
possible explanation for the differences found between decisional domains might involve the
emotional reaction triggered by the decisional problems. Implications of framing effects for
different real-life decisions are discussed.
KEYWORDS: framing effects, risk taking, decisional domains, decision
3
For several centuries, scholars in economics used the standards of the normative models in
decision to evaluate the level of the decision maker’s rationality. Although the definition of
rationality has long been debated, there is some consensus that rational decisions should, among
other criteria, satisfy the requirement of invariance (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). According to
the principle of invariance, a preference for a particular decisional option should be independent
of the terms in which it is described (Tversky & Kahneman, 1986). In other words, when the
options of a decisional situation are presented in different forms (i.e., frames), these different
wordings should not influence the decision maker's preference for a particular alternative.
However, people lack the knowledge, skills or computational resources to make decisions
consistent with the notion of economic rationality (Heilman, 2006, 2014; Simon, 1955).
Therefore, there are many compelling empirical evidence that contradict the decision maker’s
absolute rationality and indicate that certain people are prone to various sources of distortion,
which can be consistent and predictable in certain circumstances (Kahneman, 2011).
One of the most prolific lines of research that provided empirical evidence to undermine
the rationality of decision makers is related to the effect of formulating alternatives, also known
as framing effects. This effect refers to the fact that presenting the descriptions of equivalent
decisional alternatives in different terms reflects the preference for one alternative over the other,
depending on the description format. Changing one’s preference for a decisional outcome
depending on the wording of those outcomes represents a violation of the principle of invariance
(Kahneman, 2003a, 2003b). This framing effect was first demonstrated using a well-documented
experimental task, namely the Asian Disease Problem (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). The Asian
Disease Problem presents the decision-maker with a hypothetical situation in which a disease is
expected to affect 600 people. The decision-maker has to choose which one of two possible
intervention programs should be applied. The two intervention programs are described either in
gain terms (how many people will be saved) or in loss terms (how many people will die). For
each frame, the decision-maker is presented with a sure alternative, specifying the number of
people who will surely survive/die, and a probabilistic alternative, stating the probabilities that
all people should survive/die. From a mathematical point of view, the outcomes of the sure and
probabilistic alternatives are equal. Using this decisional task, the authors have shown a risk
seeking preference among participants who received the problem described in terms of loss and a
4
risk aversion tendency if the same situation was described in terms of gain (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1981). Basically, the wording of the decisional alternatives in terms of loss resulted
in 78% of the participants choosing the probabilistic alternative, while formulating the same
decisional situation in terms of gain led to the choosing of the probabilistic alternative by only
28% of the participants (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). The violation of the principle of
invariance refers to this specific reversal of one’s preferences induced by the wording of the
decisional alternatives. Once this line of research was opened, dozens of studies were published
to further provide empirical support for this decision-making bias. Moreover, the existence of the
framing effect was documented in medical or clinical decisions, consumer preferences, social
dilemmas, or negotiation situations (Cacciatore, Scheufele, & Iyengar, 2016; Levin, Schneider,
& Gaeth, 1998).
Although most studies support the robustness of this framing effect (Levin & Gaeth,
1988; Levin, Gaeth, & Schreiber, 2002; Tversky & Kahneman, 1981), there were also empirical
studies that did not replicate the phenomenon (Fagley & Miller, 1987; Mandel, 2001; Takemura,
1992, 1993). In addition, some of the studies that have identified a framing effect did not obtain
an effect size as large as that presented by Tversky and Kahneman (Bloomfield, 2006;
Kühberger, 1998; Tversky & Kahneman, 1981).
A possible reason for these conflicting results is considering framing effect as a
homogeneous effect. All decision-making situations presented in the literature as representative
of the distortion associated with the formulation of the alternatives are based on emotional
valence: the critical information for the decision is formulated either in positive or negative
terms. In order to explain the contradictory results, Levin and coworkers (1998) proposed a
taxonomy that can differentiate between three types of framing effects. Moreover, Levin and
colleagues argue that each type of framing effect has specific consequences and underlying
mechanisms (Levin et al., 1998).
The risky choice framing represents the most studied category of framing effects. This
form of decision-making bias was introduced by Tversky and Kahneman (1981) through the
Asian Disease Problem. The risky choice framing is considered the prototypical form of framing
effects (Levin et al., 1998). In this type of framing, different formulations are applied to the
results of the decisional alternatives involving varying levels of risk. In this particular decisional
5
context, Kahneman and Tversky (1981) showed a reversal of participants’ preferences: the
majority of participants who received the positive version selected the sure outcome alternative,
while participants who received the negative version of the problem mostly opted for the
probabilistic alternative. Kahneman and Tversky turned to their Prospect Theory (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992) to explain this framing effect. The Prospect Theory
assumes that the different formulations of the alternatives determine the evaluation of the
decisional outcomes in terms of gains or losses relative to the current baseline. The concept of
loss aversion, also predicted and explained by the prospect theory, refers to the fact that losses
loom larger than gains, meaning that people are more sensitive to losses than to comparable
gains. Considering loss aversion as being characteristic to most people, one can understand why
negatively framed information has more impact than positive information. It is easier for a
person to prefer a probabilistic option when it is framed in loss terms, because accepting a sure
loss is more difficult to conceive than an uncertain outcome. The reverse seems to be the case for
gain contexts (Kahneman, 2011).
The second form of framing effects is represented by the attributes framing. In this
situation the characteristics of an object or event are the ones being differently formulated. This
type of framing is considered the simplest form of framing and is relevant to understand how
descriptive valence influences information processing (Levin et al., 1998). The different frames
are applied to the attributes describing a single characteristic of an object or event, and the
dependent variable is how one evaluates that specific object or event. To illustrate this type of
framing, we refer to the study conducted by Levin and Gaeth (1988), in which the authors
manipulated the presentation of a product (“75% lean meat” or “25% fat meat”) and assessed
consumers’ preference for the product in each of the two formulations. The study results
indicated that participants rated as tastier the meat package labelled as “75% lean meat” than the
one marked “25% fat meat” (Levin & Gaeth, 1988). Similar results were seen in other areas as
well. For instance, in medical-related decisions, people are more willing to accept a certain
treatment procedure if it is described in terms related to survival rates than described referring to
mortality rates (Marteau, 1989; Wilson, Kaplan, & Schneiderman, 1987). Also risky decisions,
such as financial gambles, are preferred if presented in terms of probability of winning than if
negatively formulated by highlighting the chances of losing (Levin et al., 1986; Levin, Snyder, &
6
Chapman, 1989). One plausible explanation for this type of framing effect is linked to the way
information is encoded depending on its descriptive valence. Levin and Gaeth (1988) argue that
labelling a positive characteristic of the evaluated object leads to encoding the information by
evoking positive associations from the long-term memory. Similarly, a negative label associated
with an evaluated object or event would evoke unpleasant associations. This explanation has
already received empirical support from multiple independent research groups and is
continuously adapted to include various methodological variations (Isaac & Poor, 2016; Shafir,
1993; Shafir, Simonson, & Tversky, 1993; van Schie & van der Pligt, 1995).
The third form of framing effects refers to goal framing, more specifically, the
manipulation is applied to the formulation of the goals of a certain behavior or an action. This
type of framing is mostly investigated in communication and persuasion studies. Empirical
research shows that the impact of a persuasive message depends on the way the consequences of
an action are described. The description can either highlight the benefits of performing the action
in question or the risks if the target action is not performed. Therefore, in the positive wording of
the action, the aim is to get some positive consequences (i.e., gains), whereas in the negative
formulation the purpose is to avoid a negative consequence (i.e., losses). One classic study
illustrating the goal framing was conducted by Meyerowitz and Chaiken (1987). The two authors
have shown that women are more willing to do breast self-examination if they are given
information that reveals the negative consequences of not doing this compared to the gains of
self-palpation (Meyerowitz & Chaiken, 1987). The same effect has been achieved in other
research areas, thereby fostering the idea that messages showing possible losses from failure of
doing a certain behavior are more persuasive than messages that provide information regarding
the benefits of realizing that behavior.
In an attempt to explain the divergent results found by previous studies, numerous factors
that could influence decision-making were investigated. Methodological variations could explain
some of the discrepancies found between studies. Some empirical research addressed framing
effects in different areas or domains (e.g., human life, finance, animals or even aliens), other
studies looked into different characteristics of participants (e.g., teens vs. adults; experts vs.
novices) (Best & Charness, 2015), the size of the group being affected by the decision-making
7
situation (i.e., small groups vs. large groups). Also, there are studies aimed at investigating
individual differences of the participants, such as personality traits, emotional states or the
effects of emotion regulation strategies.
The domain on which decisions are made seems to be a crucial factor for the emergence
of the framing effect. People are more prone to framing effects in their decisions related to
human life, than in situations where decisions referred to animals (Bloomfield, 2006; Peters &
Levin, 2008; Schneider, 1992), money or properties (Fagley & Miller, 1997; Kühberger, Schulte-
Mecklenbeck, & Perner, 1999), precious metal or artwork (Jou, Shanteau & Harris, 1996; Wang,
1996a, 1996b) or even aliens (Wang, Simons, & Brédart, 2001). A meta-analysis (Kühberger,
1998) showed that scenarios involving human life and health lead to an increased size of the
framing effect compared to scenarios relevant for business decisions, social decisions, animals or
objects. Other studies confirm that people's preference for risky decisions is dependents on the
domain on which decisions are made (Kusev, Schaik, Ayton, Dent, & Chater, 2009; Mandel &
Vartanian, 2010). However, differences remain between framing effects related to decisional
domains, and even within the same domain there are framing inconsistencies.
Current Study
Previous framing related empirical work highlighted some contradicting results regarding
the existence or magnitude of risky choice framing effects. The decision-making domain might
be responsible for some of the conflicting results. More studies are needed to directly address
this issue. Therefore, our research objective was to further investigate whether framing effects
are consistent between decision-making domains. The ecological validity of the decision-making
situation was a high priority in this study, in order to permit the extrapolation of the study results
to real life decisions. To increase the study’s ecological validity, we chose to use decisional
problems that are similar to the Asian Disease Problem in the way they depict situations that
might be encountered in real life. Based on previous studies, we expected our results to indicate
the existence of framing effects for all three decisional domains under investigation. However,
considering previous contradicting results, we did not expect all problems from within a
decisional domain to elicit significant behavioral change due to the formulation of alternatives.
8
Method
Participants
The study sample included 82 healthy students (69 women, mean age = 27.13±7.52), who
were randomly selected from a larger sample of students attending undergraduate studies in
Psychology. All participants signed an informed consent before taking part in the study, in
accord with the Declaration of Helsinki (1964/2013) and the Deontological Code of the
American Psychological Association (2010).
Study materials
All participants were presented with nine vignettes that involved decision-making
scenarios similar to the one described by the Asian Disease Problem. Therefore, for each
vignette, one decisional option was sure, presenting certain consequences of choosing that
option, whereas the second option was risky in the sense that it presented probabilities associated
with possible outcomes. Framing of alternatives was manipulated so that half of the participants
were presented with the decision-making problems described in gain terms, whereas the other
half of the participants saw the same decisional situations described in loss terms. The nine
vignettes were classified in three broad decision-making domains: health and human life (two
problems), financial situations (three problems) and nature and objects (four problems). The
vignettes were originally presented in other studies and some of them were slightly modified to
refer to the national geographic or social context. Samples of vignettes pertaining to each
decisional domain are presented in Table 1. The vignettes were randomly presented and all
participants were instructed to select which option they prefer, namely the sure or the
probabilistic option.
Design and procedure
A between participants design was used to test for the effects of framing of decisional
alternatives on risk preferences in financial situations, health related situations and nature and
objects related decisional problems.
9
A female experimenter tested all participants individually and the procedure lasted
approximately 50-60 minutes. After each participant signed the informed consent, he/she was
seated at a table, in front of a computer. Participants were presented with the instructions for the
decisional problems. Half of the participants were presented either with the gain frame or the loss
frame of the problems. All nine decision-making situations were randomly presented through a
computer program. After the participant answered each of the hypothetical decisional situations,
he/she was instructed to assess the arousal and valence levels associated with the vignette.
Arousal was measured on a 5 point Likert scale, where 1 signified no arousal and 5 was
associated with high level of arousal. Valence was also measured on a 5 point Likert scale, where
1 was associated with negative emotional valence and 5 indicated positive emotional valence.
Results
Valence and arousal effects of decision-making situations
To see whether the different formulations of the decisional situations create a significant
emotional impact, we measured the level of arousal and emotional valence for each decisional
problem and we made comparisons on these measurements depending on the experimental
condition (gain vs. loss). The emotional valence was significantly different between conditions
(gain vs. loss) only for financial problems, indicating that problems that were framed in loss
terms were perceived as more negative than those framed as gains (t(81) = 3.53, p < 0.001). For
the other two categories of problems, there were no significant differences regarding emotional
valence depending on the terms that the problems were framed in (see Table 2). No frame
related differences were found in arousal levels for the three decisional domains.
Moreover, we tested whether the decisional domain would be associated with different
arousal and valence levels. To this end, we compared mean arousal and valence levels between
the three decisional domains. Our results indicate that, for the loss condition, health related
problems induced higher arousal levels than financial problems (t(40) = 3.31, p < 0.01) and
nature and objects related problems (t(40) = 2.792, p < 0.01). In the gain framing condition,
health related problems were significantly more arousing than nature and objects decisional
situations (t(40) = 2.477, p < 0.05). When looking at the decisional problems’ emotional valence,
10
our results show that, for both framing conditions (i.e., gain vs. loss), health related problems are
considered to be less pleasant than both nature and objects problems (t(40) = -3.89, p < 0.001,
respectively t(40) = -3.58, p < 0.001) as well as financial problems (t(40) = -9.11, p < 0.001,
respectively t(40) = 6.71, p < 0.001). In addition, nature and objects problems were evaluated as
less pleasant than financial problems, for both gain and loss framing conditions (t(40) = -6.75, p
< 0.001, respectively t(41) = -4.69, p < 0.001). The main results related to valence and arousal
levels are illustrated in Figure 1 A and B.
Behavioral performance
We analyzed the impact of framing on participants’ level of risk seeking in the decisional
situations. We considered the proportion of risk seeking preference as the dependent variable.
The proportion of risk seeking options was quantified by dividing the total number of responses
favoring the probabilistic option to the total number of decisional situations. Therefore, the
dependent variable took values in the [0; 1] interval. The independent variable was the framing
of decisional options, either in terms of gain or loss. Additionally, for in depth analyses, we
grouped the decisional situations according to the decision-making domain: health, financial or
human and nature domains.
A one-way ANOVA highlighted a significant overall effect of framing, with participants
selecting the risky option more frequently in the loss frame compared to the gain frame, F[1, 80]
= 38.62, p < 0.001 (ɳ2 = 0.32) (see Figure 2). Similar analyses evidenced the existence of
framing effects for problems that concerned health issues, F[1,80] = 39.81, p < 0.001(ɳ2 = 0.32),
and objects and nature issues F[1,80] = 31.33, p < 0.001 (ɳ2 = 0.28). For problems related to
financial issues, participants did not exhibit a framing effect, but we observed a general tendency
towards preferring the probabilistic option more in the loss frame compared to the gain frame
(F[1,80] = 3.02, p = 0.08, ɳ2 = 0.036) (Figure 2). No significant differences were found between
risk taking preferences for men compared to women.
11
One-sample t tests were used to further analyze whether participants’ risk taking
preference in both gain and loss frames significantly differed than the 0.5 cut-off point. This cut-
off point indicates no specific preference towards either risk seeking or risk averse decisional
outcomes. The results show that participants presented with the gain frame of the decisional
situations displayed significant risk aversion for all decision-making domains (see Table 3). For
the loss frame participants displayed significant risk seeking behavior only for the health and
nature and objects decision-making domains. Additionally, for the financial problems, we found
that participant also exhibit risk aversion in the loss frame (Table 3).
Next we investigated whether framing effects are consistent within the problems
pertaining to each domain. To this purpose, we analyzed participants’ behavioral performance
for each decisional situation. We therefore compared the frequencies with which participants
chose the risky option in both framing conditions (i.e., gain vs. loss). Our results show that the
framing effect does not appear in each decisional situation. Participants displayed significant
framing effects, thus choosing more frequently the risky choice in the loss frame and the sure
option in the gain frame, in both health related problems (χ2 = 5.89, p < 0.05, respectively χ2 =
11.3, p < 0.001), in one of the financial problems (χ2 = 10.12, p < 0.01) and in two of the nature
and objects problems (χ2 = 6.25, p < 0.05, respectively χ2 = 9.25, p < 0.01) (see Figure 3). No
significant gender differences were found in any of the nine decisional situations.
Discussions
In the present study we set out to investigate the consistency of framing effects across
three decisional domains, namely, health, finance and nature and objects. Framing effects refer to
the situations in which the different formulations of decisional alternatives result in different
decisional preferences. More specifically, it was shown that people generally prefer a sure
outcome when the options are described in gain terms, but an equivalent risky outcome is
favored when alternatives are presented in loss terms (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). Previous
empirical studies provide inconsistent results concerning the existence or magnitude of the
framing effects. Our results add to the existing literature by indicating that framing effects are
not consistent between decisional domains. More importantly, we also found that within the
12
same decisional domains, different problems elicit varying levels of framing effects. One
possible explanation for the differences found between decisional domains might involve the
emotional reaction triggered by the decisional problems.
Selecting the risky alternative in both experimental conditions was taken to indicate
participants’ behavioral performance. Our results confirmed the presence of the framing effect
for health problems and problems related to nature and objects, thus partially confirming the first
research hypothesis. In these two decisional domains participants mostly preferred the sure
outcome in the gain frame, and the risky or probabilistic outcome for the loss framing of the
alternatives. Additionally, in the health domain, participants displayed the more pronounced
framing effect. This result is consistent with other studies in the literature (Bloomfield, 2006;
Peters & Levin, 2008; Schneider, 1992) that showed the same pattern of selections. Regarding
financial issues, the participants of our study showed no effect of framing, due to the fact that in
both framing conditions prevailed the selection of the sure alternative. Therefore, the participants
in our study sample expressed aversion towards financial risk, regardless of the wording of the
decision alternatives. This result pertaining to the financial sector could be associated with
gender differences identified in this area of decision-making. Although there are many
controversies regarding the stability of a gender effect on decisions in various domains, Huang
and Wang (2010) show that men are more prone to the effect of framing in the financial domain,
while women exhibit this tendency in decisional situations targeting areas related to life and
death. Considering that our group of participants included a small number of men, we cannot
exclude the possibility that the lack of the framing effect in the financial domain might be a
consequence of gender differences in this regard. In general, our study confirms the findings of
other previous studies (Kusev et al., 2009; Kühberger, 1998; Mandel & Vartanian, 2010)
drawing attention to the fact that the domain on which decisions are made is a major factor
influencing the presence and even the magnitude of the framing effect.
Another significant result is related to participants’ attitudes towards risk taking in
different problems related to the same decisional domain. Most previous experimental studies
have addressed the attitude towards risk taking in one decisional situation relevant to each
domain. From this point of view, our study is innovative and adds further knowledge, since we
13
selected multiple decisional situations for each domain. Our results highlight behavioral
differences in attitudes towards risk in problems pertaining to the same domain, thus confirming
our expectations. In other words, it is possible that some of the previously reported diverging
results in framing effects might be due to the use of different decisional situations. In our study
we used two different problems related to health issues, three problems related to financial
decisions and four problems regarding nature and objects. Our results indicate that the framing
effect was not present in all problems related to the same domain, even though there was an
overall framing effect for the decisional domain. For example, in two of the three financial
problems and in two of the four decisional problems related to nature and objects we found no
significant behavioral differences due to the different formulations of the decisional alternatives.
This result highlights the fact that not all problems associated with the same decisional domain
elicit similar behavioral responses. Future studies could investigate various aspects related to the
content or the motivational value of the different decisional situations to eliminate possible
confounding variables in this area of research.
As a possible explanation for this result, we may refer to the participants’ self-assessed
emotional valence and arousal levels associated with each decisional situation. In the present
study we observed that regardless of how the decisional alternatives are formulated, health
problems were evaluated as being more arousing than other decisional domains, and their
emotional valence is more oriented towards the negative pole. This might partially explain the
strongest framing effect found in health problems. Although both our study and other relevant
studies (see Kühberger, 1998) show a clear effect of framing on health issues, our study may be
the first to associate the presence of this effect with a higher motivational relevance of this
domain, as measured by the greater activation and negative emotional valence of this area.
Additionally, the lack of a framing effect identified for the financial domain in our sample might
be due to the fact that the financial problems elicited the less arousal level and were also
associated with more positive emotional reactions as self-assessed through the valence scale.
Future studies could directly address the contributions of motivational relevance of a particular
decisional domain, or even specific decisional problems, to the appearance of the framing effect.
14
Conclusions
The way decisional alternatives are formulated was shown to induce major differences in
people’s preference for one option or another. This result has major implications for many areas
of human life. For example, medical decisions, for both professionals and laypeople, are
influenced by the way treatment alternatives are presented, either in terms of their success or
their failure. Health care professionals could be trained regarding this framing effect, since the
way they frame treatment options could influence the direction of intervention chosen by patients
(Almashat, Ayotte, Edelstein, & Margrett, 2008; McDermott, 2008). Another possible relevant
implication of the framing effect might regard the managers’ activity. Karevold and Teigen
(2010) conducted three empirical studies, which have shown that different descriptions of the
progress of a particular project determine managers’ decision whether to continue financing the
project. Therefore, major decisions about human life or allocation of additional financial
resources are exposed to this distortion. Our study adds to the existing literature and further
indicates new directions to explore the framing effects. If future studies confirm that the
motivational relevance of a decisional situation is an important factor contributing to people’s
risk taking preference in different frames, then training programs could be initiated in order to
reduce this biasing effect.
Even though this study has important contributions to scholars’ understanding of the
framing effect, it also has some limits. Future studies could address these limits and shed some
more light on the topic. One limitation of the current study is the between-subjects design. This
particular design does not allow us to directly compare changes in risk attitudes as a result of the
different framing conditions. In follow up studies, researchers could employ a within-subjects
design and directly test if and to what extent does risk taking preference change. Another
limitation of our research refers to the study sample. The large majority of our sample consisted
of women. Since there are studies that indicate gender differences in framing effects, especially
in the financial domain, it is highly recommended that future studies use participants’ samples
that are balanced in respect to gender.
In conclusion, our study indicates that framing effects are not consistent between
decisional domains and differences in risk taking preferences also appear within situations
15
pertaining to the same decisional domain. Our results suggest that different motivational values
of the particular decisional situations might lead to a higher or lower framing effect. Scholars are
already recognizing the need to reanalyze framing effects and to distinguish between different
categories of framing types. Our study proves once again that framing effects are, indeed, in need
of reconsideration. All the research areas that investigate framing effects, including psychology,
communication, behavioral economics, political science or sociology, would greatly benefit
should this line of theoretical and empirical investigation continue.
16
References
Almashat, S., Ayotte, B., Edelstein, B., & Margrett, J. (2008). Framing effect debiasing in
medical decision making. Patient Education and Counseling, 71(1), 102-107.
American Psychological Association (2010). Ethical principles of psychologists and code of
conduct. Retrieved from http://apa.org/ethics/code/index.aspx
Best, R., & Charness, N. (2015). Age differences in the effect of framing on risky choice: A
meta-analysis. Psychology and aging, 30(3), 688-698.
Bloomfield, A. N. (2006). Group size and the framing effect: threats to human beings and
animals. Memory and Cognition, 34(4), 929-937.
Cacciatore, M. A., Scheufele, D. A., & Iyengar, S. (2016). The End of Framing as we Know it…
and the Future of Media Effects. Mass Communication and Society, 19(1), 7-23.
Fagley, N. S., & Miller, P. M. (1987). The effects of decision making on choice of risky vs.
certain options. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 39, 264-277.
Fagley, N. S., & Miller, P. M. (1997). Framing effects and arenas of choice: Your money or your
life? Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 71,355-373.
Huang, Y., & Wang, L. (2010). Sex differences in framing effects across task domain
Personality and Individual Differences, 48, 649-653.
Isaac, M. S., & Poor, M. (2016). The sleeper framing effect: The influence of frame valence on
immediate and retrospective judgments. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 26(1), 53-65.
Jou, J., Shanteau, J., & Harris, R. J. (1996). An information processing view of framing effects:
the role of causal schemas in decision making. Memory & Cognition, 24(1), 1-15.
Kahneman, D. (2003a). A psychological perspective on economics. American Economic Review,
93, 162-168.
Kahneman, D. (2003b). Maps of bounded rationality: Psychology for behavioral economics.
American Economic Review, 93, 1449-1475.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica, 47, 263-291.
17
Karevold, K. I., & Teigen, K. H. (2010). Progress framing and sunk cost: How managers'
statements about project progress reveal their investment intentions. Journal of Economic
Psychology, 31, 719-731.
Kühberger, A. (1998). The Influence of Framing on Risky Decisions: A Meta-analysis.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 75(1), 23-55.
Kühberger, A., Schulte-Mecklenbeck, M., & Perner, J. (1999). The Effects of Framing,
Reflection, Probability, and Payoff on Risk Preference in Choice Tasks. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 78(3), 204-231.
Kusev, P., van Schaik, P., Ayton, P., Dent, J., & Chater, N. (2009). Exaggerated risk: prospect
theory and probability weighting in risky choice. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35(6), 1487-1505.
Levin, I. P., & Gaeth, G. J. (1988). Framing of attribute information before and after consuming
the product. Journal of Consumer Research, 15, 374-378.
Levin, I. P., Gaeth, G. J., & Schreiber, J. (2002). A new look at framing effects: distribution of
effect sizes, individual differences, and independence of types of effects. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 88(1), 411-429.
Levin, I. P., Johnson, R. D., Deldin, P. J., Carstens, L. M., Cressey, L. J., & Davis, C. R. (1986).
Framing effects in decisions with completely and incompletely described alternatives.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 38, 48-64.
Levin, I. P., Schneider, S. L., & Gaeth, G. J. (1998). All Frames Are Not Created Equal: A
Typology and Critical Analysis of Framing Effects. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 76(2), 149-188.
Levin, I. P., Snyder, M. A., & Chapman, D. P. (1989). The interaction of experiential and
situational factors and gender in a simulated risky decision-making task. The Journal of
Psychology, 122, 173-181.
Mandel, D. R. (2001). Gain-Loss Framing and Choice: Separating Outcome Formulations from
Descriptor Formulations. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 85(1),
56-76.
Mandel, D. R., & Vartanian, O. (2010). Frames, Brains and Content Domains: Neural and
Behavioral Effects of Descriptive Context on Preferential Choice. In O. Vartanian & D. R.
18
Mandel (Eds.), Neuroscience of decision making. (pp. 47-70). New York: Psychology
Press.
Marteau, T. M. (1989). Framing of information: its influence upon decisions of doctors and
patients. British Journal of Social Psychology, 28 (1), 89-94.
McDermott, R. (2008). Medical decision making: lessons from psychology. Urologic Oncology:
Seminars and Original Investigations, 26(6), 665-668.
Meyerowitz, B. E., & Chaiken, S. (1987). The effect of message framing on breast self-
examination attitudes, intentions, and behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 52(3), 500-510.
Peters, E., & Levin, I. P. (2008). Dissecting the risky-choice framing effect: Numeracy as an
individual-difference factor in weighting risky and riskless options. Judgement and
Decision Making, 3(6), 435-448.
Heilman, R. M. (2006). The impact of emotions and individual differences upon economic
decision-making: A review of experimental literature. Cognition, Brain, Behavior: An
Interdisciplinary Journal, 10, 439-459.
Heilman , R. M. (2014). Individual differences in emotion and decision-making. Implications for
economic psychology [in Romanian]. Cluj Napoca: Romanian Association for Cognitive
Science Publishing House (ASCR).
Schneider, S. L. (1992). Framing and conflict: aspiration level contingency, the status quo, and
current theories of risky choice. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 18(5), 1040-1057.
Shafir, E. (1993). Choosing versus rejecting: why some options are both better and worse than
others. Memory & Cognition, 21(4), 546-556.
Shafir, E., Simonson, I., & Tversky, A. (1993). Reason-based choice. Cognition, 49(1-2), 11-36.
Simon, H. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69,
99-118.
Takemura, K. (1992). Effect of decision time on framing of decision: a case of risky choice
behavior. Psychologia, 35, 180-185.
Takemura, K. (1993). The effect of decision frame and decision justification on risky choice.
Japanese Psychological Research, 35, 36-40.
19
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice.
Science, 211(4481), 453-458.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1986). Rational choice and the framing of decisions. Journal of
Business, 59(4), 251-278.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation
of uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297-323.
van Schie, E. C. M., & van der Pligt, J. (1995). Influencing risk preference in decision making:
The effects of framing and salience. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 63, 264-275.
Wang, X. T. (1996a). Domain-specific rationality in human choices: violations of utility axioms
and social contexts. Cognition, 60(1), 31-63.
Wang, X. T. (1996b). Framing effects: Dynamics and task domains. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 68, 145-157.
Wang, X. T., Simons, F., & Bredart, S. (2001). Social cues and verbal framing in risky choice.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 14, 1-15.
Wilson, D. K., Kaplan, R. M., & Schneiderman, L. J. (1987). Framing of decisions and
selections of alternatives in health care. Social Behavior, 2, 51-59.
World Medical Association (1964/2013). WMA Declaration of Helsinki - Ethical Principles for
Medical Research Involving Human Subjects. Retrieved from
http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/b3/index.html
20
Table 1.
A sample of the decisional vignettes used in the study. One vignette from each domain is
illustrated.
Problem 1 – health and human life domain
Imagine that an outburst of an unusual disease is expected in Romania and this disease is
anticipated to cause 600 victims. Two programs were proposed in order to fight this disease
outburst. Assuming the following scientific estimates of the two programs, which program would
you prefer?
Gain frame Loss frame
Program A: 200 people will be surely saved. Program C: 400 people will surely die.
Program B: There is a 1/3 probability that all
600 people will be saved and a 2/3 probability
that no one will be saved.
Program D: There is a 1/3 probability that no
one will die and a 2/3 probability that all 600
people will die.
Problem 2 – nature and objects domain
Due to fires that have destroyed numerous hectares of forest in Cluj County and resulted already
in the death of hundreds of forest animals. Cluj County Committee for Emergency Situations
proposed two different programs aiming at protecting the rest of the forest animals. The forests
in Cluj County accommodate 3600 living animals. Which program would you choose?
Gain frame Loss frame
Program A: 1200 animals will be surely
saved.
Program C: 2400 animals will surely die.
Program B: There is a 1/3 probability that all
3600 animals will be saved and a 2/3
probability that no animal will be saved.
Program D: There is a 1/3 probability that no
animal will die and a 2/3 probability that all
3600 animals will die.
Problem 6 – financial domain
Imagine that you invested 60.000 RON in shares at a company that entered bankruptcy. The
company’s managers have proposed two programs to save some of the invested money. Which
program would you chose?
Gain frame Loss frame
Program A: 20.000 RON will be surely
recovered.
Program C: 40.000 RON will be surely lost.
Program B: There is a 1/3 probability that all
60.000 RON invested will be recovered and a
2/3 probability that no money will be
recovered.
Program D: There is a 2/3 probability that all
60.000 RON invested will be lost and a 1/3
probability that no money will be lost.
21
Table 2.
Arousal and valence levels associated with the decision-making problems, categorized by
domain of decision (i.e., financial, health, nature and objects)
Gain Loss Overall
Arousal Financial 3.66 ± 0.56 3.38 ± 0.84 3.52 ± 0.72
Health 3.75 ± 0.65 3.86 ± 0.74 3.81 ± 0.69
Nature & objects 3.54 ± 0.60 3.55 ± 0.73 3.55 ± 0.66
Valence Financial 2.83 ± 0.59 2.40 ± 0.50 2.62 ± 0.59
Health 1.96 ± 0.69 1.72 ± 0.66 1.84 ± 0.68
Nature & objects 2.27 ± 0.68 1.98 ± 0.68 2.12 ± 0.69
Note: Values in the table represent mean and standard deviations for arousal and valence levels.
22
Table 3.
Means and standard deviations for participants’ risk seeking preference for gain and loss
frames.
Frame Mean ± SD t test value
Gain T_R 0.27 ± 0.18 t(40) = -7.62 (p < 0.001)
H_R 0.31 ± 0.33 t(40) = -3.54 (p < 0.001)
F_R 0.29 ± 0.31 t(40) = -4.27 (p < 0.001)
NO_R 0.24 ± 0.26 t(40) = -6.18 ( p < 0.001)
Loss T_R 0.56 ± 0.23 t(40) = 1.87 (p < 0.06)
H_R 0.75 ± 0.29 t(40) = 5.49 (p < 0.001)
F_R 0.4 ± 0.27 t(40) = -2.19 (p < 0.05)
NO_R 0.59 ± 0.3 t(40) = 2.04 (p < 0.05)
Note. One-sample t test values indicate participants’ risk seeking preference compared to the 0.5
cut-off point. T_R = total risk taking; H_R = risk taking in health related problems; F_R =risk
taking in financial problems; NO_R = risk taking in nature and objects related problems.
23
Figure 1. Mean levels of arousal and valence, depending the experimental condition (gain vs.
loss frame). Error bars represent one standard error of the mean.
B
0
.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Valence mean
0
.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Arousal mean
Financial Health Nature &
objects
Gain
A
Financial Nature &
objects
Health
Loss
24
Figure 2. Proportion of risky choices depending on the problem domain and framing of
alternatives (gain vs. loss). Error bars represent one standard error of the mean. The dashed
horizontal line marks the 0.5 cut-off point, indicating either risk seeking preference (if the
proportion of risky choices > 0.5) or risk averse preference (if the proportion of risky choices <
0.5). T_R = total risk taking; H_R = risk taking in health related problems; F_R =risk taking in
financial problems; NO_R = risk taking in nature and objects related problems.
25
Figure 3. Frequency of risky choices for each decisional problem for gain and loss formulation
of alternatives. H1 and H2 = health related problems; F1, F2 and F3 = financial problems; NO1,
NO2, NO3 and NO4 = nature and objects related problems.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
H1 H2 F1 F2 F3 NO1 NO2 NO3 NO4
Frequency of risky choices
Gain Loss