Work in progress – circulated for comment 1
How to Innovate:
The tools for social innovation
Robin Murray, Geoff Mulgan & Julie Caulier‐Grice
This paper provides a first output from a major study on the methods being used to generate
and grow social innovation around the world. These methods come from many fields –
public policy, design, technology, business, community organising, the professions and
social entrepreneurship.
Some are used consciously as distinct methods, but many are not. Indeed, our research
suggests that relatively few people working in the field have had the chance to reflect on the
methods that they already use, and that even fewer are aware of the other methods in
neighbouring fields which they could be using. As a whole, the field is less self‐aware than
business, medicine or science. This is in part a symptom of relative newness. But one of the
premises of this project is that greater awareness of methods will improve the practice, and
success, of social innovation in fields as diverse as ageing, the environment, mental health,
education and welfare.
The annex to this paper sets out a first collection of nearly 300 methods and supporting
conditions which are either in use or being considered in the dynamic field of social
innovation. These are set out both according to where they are used (in the non‐profit grant
economy, the public sector, the market and the household) and according to their uses in the
different stages of innovation, that take ideas from inception to impact.
The methods are varied: they range from Finnish Complaints Choirs to Korean imagination
banks, from Italy’s social enterprise bank to US venture philanthropy models, Danish public
service laboratories to Brazilian participatory budgeting.
The study is being done by a team at the Young Foundation with support from NESTA. The
list draws in part on past research i, and in part on inputs from practitioners, intermediaries,
and the many members of the Social Innovation Exchange across the world. We welcome
comments, amendments, additions and examples to contribute to what will become an open
website to guide practitioners in the field as well as a printed guide.
The purpose of this material will be to guide and support the practice of all those who
contribute to helping societies think, adapt and innovate: governments and policy‐makers
who can do so much to create the conditions for innovation, or to crush them; foundations
and philanthropists with free money; NGOs and associations trying to meet needs more
effectively; as well as entrepreneurs and innovators themselves.
This paper aims to prompt reflection, while also providing useful concepts, inspiration as
well as practical tools. It has four parts:
Work in progress – circulated for comment 2
• I Background: the first part situates the context for this explosion of different
methods. It addresses why social innovation is coming to be seen as such an
important issue for governments, communities, businesses and places.
• II The architecture of the social economy: the second part describes the growing
social economy, which cuts across all sectors, with a variety of types of input, output,
conceptions, as well as distinctive approaches to innovation.
• III The process of social innovation. This identifies four stages of development of an
innovation, not necessarily sequential, but looped, spun off, then re‐connected.
• IV Methods and supports: the fourth part is an annex that provides an initial list of
methods and enabling conditions
I Background: why social innovation now?
We are currently in the midst of a period of transformative innovation. Two sometimes
clashing, sometimes coinciding, themes give it its distinctive character. One comes from
technology: the spread of networks and global infrastructures for information and social
networking tools. The other comes from culture and values: the growing emphasis on the
human dimension, on putting people first, giving democratic voice and starting with the
individual and relationships rather than systems and structures.
The first of these has already revolutionised the economy. With hindsight it will seem
astonishing that a company (Google) can within a decade of its founding grow to be in the
top 10 companies in the world. Amazon, E Bay, MySpace, Apple, Linux, Microsoft – these
are the new names, many of them having started their life in a garage, that have provided
the infrastructure, the platforms and the tools of a post industrial age. The pace and extent of
the present change is reminiscent of previous technological revolutions – the spread of the
factory system, of the railway age, of those years when the principles of mass production
finally took root in manufacturing. This time the revolution is in information and
communication technologies, and in many fields where new knowledge is being applied,
from genomics to materials. It is a revolution that has transformed the process of innovation
itself.
As in previous technological revolutions, the state – and in particular the military – has
played a decisive role as a patron and incubator of innovation (including the Internet, the
web and a substantial proportion of the investment in Silicon Valley). But much of the drive
has come through private innovation via companies operating in the market, and through
unprecedented citizen action which has mushroomed since 1989.
For most of the 20 th century innovation policy and practice was primarily concerned with
hardware and with the market economy. Social innovation took place – in daily life, social
movements and around the state. But it has only recently come to be a conscious concern of
policy discussion for three main reasons.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 3
First, there are a range of problems that existing structures and policies have found it
impossible to crack – such as climate change, the world wide epidemic of chronic disease,
and widening inequality. These are all issues that cut across boundaries, between the state,
the market and the household, between different parts of the state, and between national
states themselves. As a result the classic tools of government policy on the one hand, and
market solutions on the other, have proved inadequate.
Second, the prospective cost of dealing with these (quite apart from the rising costs of other
social issues) threatens to swamp public budgets – and in the case of climate change, or
health care in the US, private budgets as well. To take only one instance, if radical policies
cannot stem the increase in chronic disease, the cost of healthcare is forecast to rise from 9%
to 12.5% of GDP in the UK in 15 years and from 16% to 20% in the US within a decade. In
this instance – as in climate change, pollution control, waste reduction, poverty and welfare
programmes, and other fields such as criminal justice or traffic congestion – the most
effective policies are preventative. End of pipe measures are costly and should be
unnecessary. But effective prevention has been notoriously difficult to introduce, in spite of
its transparent economic and social benefits. This is a challenge for social innovation.
Third, as in earlier technological and social transformations, there is a disjunction between
the structures and institutions formed in a previous period and the requirements of the new.
This is as true for the private as for the social economy. New paradigms tend to flourish in
areas where the institutions are most open to them, and where the forces of the old are
weak. So, for example, there is more innovation around self‐management of diseases and
public health than around hospitals; more innovation around recycling and energy
efficiency than around large scale energy production; more innovation around public
participation than in parliaments and assemblies; more innovation around active ageing
than around pensions provision. Everywhere innovations give rise to pressures for a wider
change – to the way the economies are managed, to the supply and housing of appropriate
labour, to new infrastructure and sources of energy, to new forms of consumption, and to
the organisation and financing of government.
We are currently at one of the rare moments when a new set of paradigms challenges the
previous ones. In place of the old world of mass production, with its standardised products
and services, its reliance on deskilled labour, its cumbrous system of innovation, its focus on
scale and all that enables it, its centralised structures of organisation and information, and
the long standing disjunction of home and overseas markets, we have seen the emergence of
a new world.
This new world is one formed around distributed systems as much as centralised structures.
It handles complexity not by standardisation and simplification imposed from the centre,
but by distributing complexity to the margins – to the local managers and workers on the
shop floor, as much as to the consumers themselves. Those at the margins have what central
managers can never have – knowledge of specificity ‐ specificity of time, of place, of
particular events and in the consumer’s case of need and desire. We enter a world of
differentiation and the dissolution of the norm. The micro can now be aggregated to the
Work in progress – circulated for comment 4
macro. In place of scale (which is the simple issue) the new concerns are with economies of
scope, of information, and most strikingly of trust.
In factories and workshops we have witnessed over the past twenty years a radical re‐
orientation of the governing principle of production – something like a magnetic reversal –
from a push‐through to a pull‐through economy. Instead of the focus being on optimising
the use of capacity of the mass production line, with a stock of products always in search of
an average consumer, the supply and distribution chain has been re‐oriented to respond to
real time consumer demand, ‘just in time’. This is itself a revolution within a revolution,
enabling a whole productive system to meet a differentiated demand.
The role of the consumer changes as a result, from a passive to an active player, not only as a
navigator and even shaper of the emerging kingdom governed by the tyranny of choice, but
as a producer in their own right – Alvin Toffler’s ‘prosumer.’ii It has at last been
acknowledged that retail purchases that have been cast as the end point of the linear process
of mass production are part of a circular process of household production and reproduction.
The so‐called consumer doubles as a domestic producer ‐ a cook, a mother, a carer, a
shopper, a driver, a nurse, a gardener, a teacher or student ‐ in short so much of what is
entailed in making us human. This domestic sphere has previously been seen as outside the
economy, as too complex and ungovernable, but has come now to be recognised as critical
economically, with all the needs of support, tools, skills and advice that being a producer
entails.
Firms that have failed to adapt to this new world – whether they are bookshops, auctioneers,
or steel makers – have either gone out of business or shifted production to the zones of
cheaper labour in Eastern Europe and Asia. Those that are still standing, have recognised
that it is their capacity to provide bespoke services – with products being reconceptualised
as part of a service – and above all their capacity to innovate on which their future depends.
Similar shifts can be seen in the social economy. The mechanisms of service and
institutional transformation are different within government and in grant funded economies
from those in competitive markets. They also differ around the world, shaped by
institutional, political and cultural histories which have lent very different roles to the state,
civil society and the market. But there are some common patterns, and new innovations
from distance learning and microcredit, to open forms of governance, urban agriculture and
patient‐led healthcare have flourished in different environments. Similar approaches can be
found amongst some of the leading edge organisations in very different places – like the
Hope Institute in Korea and Kennisland in the Netherlands, PLAN in Canada and Honeybee
in India.
In both the market and the state, the rise of distributed networks has coincided with a
marked turn towards the human, the personal and the individual. This has brought a
greater interest in the quality of relationships (what Jim Maxmin and Shoshanna Zuboff call
the ‘support economy’ iii); it has led to lively innovation around personalisation (from new
types of mentor to personal accounts); a new world rich in information and feedback (such
as AMEE, tracking carbon outputs in 150 different countries); and growing interest in
Work in progress – circulated for comment 5
pathways (for example from early childhood into adulthood) and service journeys (whether
of a patient through a health system or a passenger through an airport).
With this emphasis on the individual has come an interest in experience as well as formal
outcomes; in subjective feedback as well as the quantitative metrics of the late 20 th century
state and economy (hence the rise of innovations like the expert patient, or Patient Opinion).
Public policy has also turned towards the household, through innovations like nurse‐family
partnerships and green concierges.
Some of what is happening in the market entails the adoption of ideas from the social sector
– collaboration, cooperation, trust‐based networks, user involvement in service design, for
example, are all familiar concepts in the social field and are now seen as on the cutting edge
of business. Yet some of the new methods are as challenging to existing charities, non‐
governmental organisations and cooperatives as they are to mainstream businesses and
public agencies. Indeed one of the common themes of social innovation is that it often
challenges relationships of power, creating sites of contest and conflict. This is evident in
relation to distributed networks which have the potential to devolve and spread power, but
also great potential to concentrate power (think, for example of Google). Similar tensions are
visible in the field of social entrepreneurship (which straddles decentralised models rooted
in community organising and a powerful new cadre of entrepreneurs often educated in
Western business schools, tied into global consultancies, and backed by foundations rooted
in big business); and in relation to public policy (which often seeks to co‐opt grassroots
innovators to serve the interests of big government).
A Hybrid Economy
So how can the innovations needed to address ever more pressing (and costly) social and
environmental demands be generated in the social economy, and grown in ways that spread
power rather than concentrating it?
Traditionally, those social tasks for which the private market is inadequate have fallen to
three quite different economies, the state, the household, and the grant economy. Each has
its own means of obtaining resources, each its own structures of control and allocation, its
own rules and customs for the distribution of its outputs, and its principles of reciprocity. In
the industrial economies of the twentieth century, nations reached different settlements
about the border lines and responsibilities of each. In Western Europe and Canada, the state
played the leading role. In the USA a tradition of resistance to ‘big government’ left
households to manage as best they could, with a greater role played by charitable
foundations (though still with a large state by historical standards, and one that has played a
role in funding a number of major commercial innovations).
Social innovation, in this context, refers not to any particular sector of the economy, but to
innovation in the creation of social outputs and outcomes regardless of where they spring
from. This is illustrated by the shaded area in Diagram 1. None of the four economies is
wholly concerned with the social economy as defined above ‐ production oriented to social
needs and aspirations. The market economy itself, although largely private, nevertheless
Work in progress – circulated for comment 6
engages in the social economy in the form, for example, of corporate social responsibility or
movements like fair trade. The household, like the market, is in part purely private, but
forms a critical part of the social economy both through labour in the household, and via the
contribution to the substance and direction of social production of informal networks,
associations and social movements. The grant economy, on the other hand, is by its nature
largely concerned with the delivery of services as a counterpoint to the private market, as is
much state spending. The shaded area therefore represents those parts of each of the four
sub economies that together constitute the social economy.
Diagram 1. The Social Economy
The boundaries and responsibilities of each of these social sectors as established in the
period of mass production are being brought into question, as is the distinction between the
market and the social economy. The binary opposition between the market and the state,
which was the fulcrum of twentieth century politics (and its ideologies), is being
contextualised into a more complex set of relations as the market reaches into the state, and
the state into the market, and as both find new accommodations with civil society and the
grant economy.
The old boundary criteria of private and public goods, the one being assigned to the market
and the other to the state, is no longer adequate. It is not just a question of the characteristics
of a good or a service and its intrinsic capacity to be commodified that determines whether it
should be undertaken in the private or the public sphere. It is also a question first of the
kind of market, the kind of state, and the nature of the interface between them, and second
of how the state and the market relate to those two other economic types, the household and
the grant economy.
When it comes to considering social innovation, therefore, the inquiry can in no way be
confined to any one sector – such as the so called third sector. It has to cover all these sectors,
Work in progress – circulated for comment 7
and the dynamics of the relations between them. Its capacity to innovate will depend as
much on innovation in the structures, the goals and the cross border relations of each of the
four economic spheres, as on any specific role that each has traditionally played.
Reaching beyond the limitations of categories allows us to explore how markets can be re‐
institutionalised so that they meet the goals of the social economy – so those operating in the
market can include in their goals and their calculus what was previously excluded. This is
the burden of much recent environmental policy that seeks to redefine the responsibilities of
private property, to internalise costs and benefits that were previously external, reframing
regulations and incentives to this end. It runs in parallel with the question of how to re‐
institutionalise the state, including transforming concepts of public property and the means
of ‘commensurating’ social productioniv , and reshaping the state’s methods of allocation and
control. All these have been threads in the fabric of British health service reform.
Considering social innovation as stemming from multiple sources encourages us to
recognise emergent trends from outside the state and the private market. One is new forms
of mutual action between individuals within the household economy – whether in the form
of open source software, or web based social networking around specific issues (there are
reportedly 18 million cancer websites, the great majority generated by those affected by the
disease). These are two examples of We‐Think innovation that inform Charles Leadbeater’s
proposition that production for the masses is being replaced by production by the masses. In
these instances the innovations are generated outside the market and outside the state, many
of them explicitly so. They have had to develop their own protocols and codes of conduct,
and in the case of open source software, the terms on which the uncommodified information
can be used.
The implications of peer‐to‐peer collaboration of this kind for many of the contemporary
social economic issues have only begun to be explored, and prompt the question of whether
and how such systems of highly distributed innovation and mutual support can be
encouraged – how do they relate to the state and the market, and to their terms of funding
and employment. Who will provide the necessary tools and platforms? Who will determine
the protocols? Can they be self managed, or will they need hosts and intermediaries? These
are some of the questions thrown up by this explosive area of innovation.
Another striking development has been the growth of social enterprise operating within the
market. These are companies with a social mission, often socially owned and investing their
profits in pursuit of their mission. The Mondragon group of cooperatives in Spain (the
world’s most successful social enterprise) has doubled in size each decade for thirty years,
operating in sectors as diverse as banking, manufacturing and higher education. BRAC,
now the developing world’s largest NGO, has spread from microcredit into an equally
diverse range of activities in Bangladesh and around the world.
One of the most visible examples of social enterprise is the Grameen Bank and its network of
27 enterprises and imitators, whose driving goal is to improve the incomes and well being of
the poorest. The rural villages of Bangledesh, where its work is centred, could hardly be
farther from Silicon Valley, yet Grameen has many of the characteristics of the new
Work in progress – circulated for comment 8
paradigm – a highly distributed credit network in 39,000 villages, by far the most extensive
in the country, a method for personalising loans and easing their repayment, and a support
structure based on networks of women. As a social enterprise, it is majority owned and
governed by its borrowers, 98% of them women. Significantly it calls its lending ‘micro’
credit and it has grown both by the spread of its model internationally, and through its own
diversification in Bangladesh into mobile communications, internet services, education, fish
farming, weaving, housing and most recently yoghurt manufacture.
How this is done and its underlying economic and organisational model has a significance
that extends well beyond the rural poor of Bangladesh. Here the point is that Grameen
operates in the market with the same freedom and discipline as a private company, but with
a social goal, social ownership and a social distribution and re‐investment of profits.
There has been a substantial growth of such firms in the past twenty years. They have had a
marked impact on the nature and direction of growth in a number of sectors – in
environmental technologies and services, for example, and the production and marketing of
food, and in fair trade. In each of these cases innovation by social enterprises has provoked
responses from the private sector and the state.
Mohammed Yunus, the founder of Grameen, has established and extended his enterprises in
spite of the obstacles and opposition of a weak and corrupt state, and an orthodox banking
system. He argues that social enterprises – at times in partnership with private corporations
– are the most hopeful forms of social innovation and the delivery of services rather than
states or charities. His project is to socialise the market rather than replace it. Around the
world new institutions have grown up to assist this transition – from Banca Prossima in Italy
to Sitawi in Brazil, and from schools for social entrepreneurs in the UK to the many
networks (like Skoll and Ashoka) based in the US.
The economics of social innovation
Over the past twenty five years the predominant economic discourse in relation to the social
economy has been a modern version of the classical debate between Smith and Ricardo, the
one emphasising micro commodity exchange through the market, the other macro
distribution through the agency of the state. In modern dress, the former has been applied to
the public sector as a means of reducing costs and increasing efficiency. It has been
advanced through the actual or simulated commodification of what had previously been
commensurated and distributed according to the non market conventions of public finance.
The latter has struggled with the question of state led redistribution in the context of the
international mobility of capital and entrepreneurial labour. Yet neither of these traditions
adequately addressed the economy wide issues of accumulation and what Schumpeter later
called capitalism’s process of creative destruction, with its focus on the material
characteristics of production and technological innovation.
We want to suggest a Schumpeterian approach to social innovation, that is, examining what
type of economy can generate and accumulate social innovation, and what if any are the
Work in progress – circulated for comment 9
processes of creative destruction in the social economy that allow new ways of meeting
social needs to supersede or reconstitute the old.
Traditionally, the primary site of innovation has been taken to be the private market because
it has well developed structures, mechanisms and incentives that drive innovation. States
and the grant economy still dominate fundamental research into new cures and new
technologies. But they cannot match the scope and diffusion of innovation seen in the
market. The household – that most distributed of economic systems – generates ideas but
on its own lacks the capital, surplus time and organisational capacity to fully develop them.
The question suggested by developments such as social networking, open source software,
and Grameen, is whether the social economy can develop a capacity to foster and generalise
innovations that matches the private market. Can it move from a responsive filling of the
gaps left by the private market, to generate an economic dynamic of its own?
Posing the issue of social innovation in this way suggests that there are three principal levels
of inquiry that we need to pursue. The first is a macro one about innovations in the
structures and mechanisms of the social economy that would strengthen its capacity to
develop and diffuse innovation. It asks what types of institutions and modes of economic
operation are necessary to generate adequate responses to the social imperatives now
confronting us.
The second is a micro enquiry into the process of social innovation – also in the
Schumpeterian tradition ‐ about how new ideas are generated and tested out in practice,
how they can establish themselves sustainably, how they extend and spread, and how they
can confront, by‐pass or transform the restrictive structures of the old order.
The third is an inquiry into innovation in productive systems. What are the strategies and
processes that lead to the re‐shaping of the complex topography of critical areas of social
production and distribution ‐ of who does what, how and with whom – in ways that reflect
the changing paradigm.
The three levels of inquiry mark three areas of social innovation. The first analyses the
institutional conditions for social innovation, the second the distinct processes of social
innovation and the third the systemic innovations that are needed to address the
imperatives of our era.
II The architecture of the social economy
Here, we outline the architecture for the inquiry, and our analysis of the shape of the social
economy.
The next three diagrams deal with the reconfiguration of the first of these spheres, the social
economy. In diagram 2, we set out the four sub economies and suggest some of the key
areas of change for the promotion of endogenous innovation.
Diagram 2. The architecture for the analysis of social innovation.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 10
These sub economies are not in any way isolated. Though they have their own distinct
economic mechanisms, they form part of an inter‐connected system, and it is the
relationships between them which are as significant as the relationships within them. The
enquiry will consider the key interfaces and how they can be modified in order to promote
innovation.
Formally, if there are four sub economies, there will be six interfaces, as shown in diagram 4
below.
Diagram 3. The six interfaces of the social economy.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 11
The first three interfaces are between the state and the other three sub‐economies.1 Central to
these interfaces is the way finance crosses the borders, inwards in the form of taxation and
fees, outwards in the form of grants, procurement and investment. There are many others,
including the regulatory, fiscal and legal conditions determined by the state, and the
platforms and tools provided by the state for the actors in other parts of the social economy.
Each of these can be critical for innovation (for example changes in personal tax to allow
new forms of caring ) and are subject to innovation in themselves (for example the creation
of community interest company status as an element in company law).
The fourth interface is between the private market and grant economy. These relations
include, for example, corporate sponsorship, charitable donations, mentoring and various
types of corporate social responsibility. There are also emergent forms of productive
collaboration between private corporations and NGOs exemplified in the work of Philips in
developing new models of healthcare, combining commercial provision of goods and
services with mutual support and roles for NGOs.
The fifth and sixth interfaces (along with the third) constitute the household economy’s
relations with the other three sub‐economies. Taking that between the household and the
private market first, this is of course the space where firms operate, selling products and
services to households and engaging individuals as workers. In some cases firms have used
the particular relations that characterise households as a channel for selling. The extent to
which social networks and a gift economy operate in the sphere of consumption has long
been remarked on by anthropologists for example (from Christmas presents to the purchase
of rounds of beer). But there are broader connections as in the way social movements have
allied with sections of the private sector to press for systemic changes – for example the
current political economy of environmental change.
Between the grant and the household economies there are also two way movements, of
donations and volunteering from one direction to a multitude of services from the other.
One of the most sensitive areas of this interface is when associations and movements from
the household economy partially transfer themselves into the grant economy, appointing
professionals paid for by subscriptions or grants.
These examples are the tidy, analytical depiction of the interfaces. In practice, however, each
sub economy may relate simultaneously to a number of the others.2 For example, the state
can promote social innovation in the market as well as the grant economy by applying
certain policy and regulatory levers such as minimum trading standards and compulsory
targets for the employment of people with disabilities.
1 The social components of these three sub economies outside the state are the economic parallel to civil society,
and could be thought of as the civil economy, that it to say that part of the social economy that is outside the
state.
2 There are also interfaces within each sub economy, from example between the private and social markets.
This may take the form of joint ventures, as in the recent case of Grameen-Danone and their collaboration in a
social enterprise producing yoghurt for low income households in Bangladesh.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 12
This is also the case with household generated innovation; there are a number of areas to
explore that cut across and apply to the three interfaces between the household and the
other sub economies. First is the development of new systems of support economy as put
forward by Jim Maxmin and Soshana Zuboff in their book of that name. This is closely
linked to the development of co‐creation and co‐production representing a partnership
between households and professionals. Personal budgets (introduced for people with
disabilities in the UK in the 2000s), for example, are an important innovation in this space –
allowing for new types of support service that combine informal relationships of friends and
family with formal provision.
There is then the whole subject of household time and how it relates to social production
and innovation. One of the questions here is how if at all it would be possible to
acknowledge the voluntary time contributed by the household sector, either individually or
collectively, in some form of credits for cash or public rights and reduced obligations. This
is already becoming a key issue in relation to ageing – how to recognise and reward
different types of care and volunteering.
Finally, there is the complex issue of managing space – moving beyond the sharp
public/private distinction, to degrees of the social, and how public space is allocated and
administered. This question is of course central to current discussions of urban and rural
policy (from lighting, to curfews, to concierges and street wardens, and of course to many
aspects of urban transport). Here we want to focus on how spatial issues of this kind bear on
the capacity for the household sector to innovate – for example in forms of recreation or in
the initiatives termed ‘guerrilla gardening’.
In the following diagram, we have picked out a couple of key examples for each of the six
interfaces. These examples are illustrative rather than exhaustive but are meant to highlight
the issues of relevance to the present enquiry.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 13
Diagram 4. The Six Interfaces
Work in progress – circulated for comment 14
III The process of innovation
We now move to the process of innovation, from the initial generation and trialling of ideas,
to their establishment on a sustainable basis. This is often referred to as scaling, and in some
cases the word is appropriate, as the innovation is generalised within an organisation (as in
the state) or the organisation itself expands. But scaling is a concept from the mass
production age, and we need to identify many other ways in which innovations take hold in
the social economy. It may be through inspiration and emulation, or through the provision
of support and know how from one to another.
In many spheres the issue is as much about connecting many similar initiatives so that they
become collectively stronger – developing some services in common where scale is
important. What is notable is that as innovation spreads it will take its own form in different
places. It is a strength that while there may be a common inspiration or model, there will be
a process of continuous innovation where each part – including the pioneers – learn from
each other.
These processes are shown in Diagram 5. They are not linear but have feedback loops and
leaps between them, but they do indicate a trend in the development of an innovation. In
discussions of social innovation, the focus has been primarily on the generation of
innovation on the one hand and the diffusion of innovation on the other. But from the point
of view of the practitioner it is the ability to sustain an innovation that is often the greatest
challenge – either through operating in the market or establishing a reliable, long term
source of funding. That is the challenge for those operating outside the state, and constitutes
the basis on which diffusion depends.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 15
Diagram 5. The Process of Social Innovation
Work in progress – circulated for comment 16
There is a second challenge. In the process of spreading, social innovations commonly come
up against the barriers and hostility of an old order. Pilots and pioneers may side step these
barriers, but the extent to which they can grow and diffuse will often depend on the creation
of new conditions to make the innovations economically viable. These conditions include
new technologies, supply chains, institutional forms, skills, and regulatory and fiscal
framework. We refer to this stage as system innovation, and it commonly involves changes
in all four sectors, usually over long periods of time.
Diagram 6 sets out a number of intractable areas where systemic innovation is called for,
and examines the issue of how such innovation has taken root, or been blocked, as a basis
for informing a strategy for transformative social innovation.
Diagram 6. Transformative Social Innovation
Between the policy and its realisation lies the shadow. For many years politics centred on
the content of policy. In the past 20 years it has been forced to turn its attention to the
shadow, and recognise that policy and its means of realisation are interwoven. We live in a
post‐Enlightenment world, where the pragmatic tradition of the interplay between thinking
and doing, between theory and practice, offers an approach appropriate to the inquiry
outlined here. We are, in other words, working in the tradition of John Dewey (and more
recently of figures such as Roberto Mangabeira Unger) rather than that of social engineers
and planners.
In the annex that follows we have listed possible innovations under each of these headings,
with examples of where they have been tried or realised. These too are provisional, to be
filled out, revised and added to – not least to draw on a much wider body of experience of
social innovation than is contained here.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 17
Annex
IV The Methods
This section provides a list of key methods that play a role in social innovation – from the
methods that create the conditions for innovation to specific methods for funding, for
design, for growth, inspiration and assessment. It draws on experiences from many
countries and from many fields – including public policy, social entrepreneurship, business,
design, technology, finance, professions as well as intermediaries and incubators.
As outlined above, the list is structured in the following way:
First, we look at the methods which help create the conditions for social innovation ‐ the
structures, mechanisms, systems and flows of the social economy that would strengthen its
capacity to develop and diffuse innovation. Finance is key, but so too are: skills; lesson
sharing; how time is organised; metrics for assessment and platforms.
Second, we look at the distinct processes of social innovation – how new ideas are
generated, tested out in practice, how they become sustainable, how they spread, scale and
mutate and how they move from the margins to the mainstream.
Finally, we examine the nature of systemic innovation: the experience of disruptive
innovation with particular regard to emergent patterns of diffusion and system
transformation.
The list is neither definitive nor comprehensive. During the course of the project we are
building up more detailed descriptions and case studies to fill the list out. At this stage our
aim is to elicit engagement: what are the key gaps? Which items should not be on the list?
What might be the most useful typologies and organising principles?
Work in progress – circulated for comment 18
Index
Section 1 ‐ Conditions for an innovative social economy 20
A. The Public Economy 20
I. Public Finance: methods to generate internal innovation 20
a) Changing the tax relationship 21
b) Budgetary practice to promote internal innovation 21
c) Distributed accountability and democratic innovation 21
d) A public medium of exchange 22
e) Public investment, loans and means of payment 23
II. Public labour: redesigning the labour contract 23
III. Organisational forms 24
a) Internal 24
b) Brokers & intermediaries 24
c) Professional collaboratives 24
IV. Metrics and assessment 25
V. The circuit of information 25
B. The Grant Economy 25
I. Generation of Innovative projects 26
II. Finance 26
a) Grant giving 26
b) The grant relationship 27
c) Purchasing and commissioning 27
d) Investment 27
e) Mission driven investment 27
III. Packages of Support 28
IV. Platforms, tools and protocols for innovation 28
V. Governance and accountability 28
VI. Regulatory, fiscal, legal and other conditions for extending the social economy 28
C. Social Innovation in the Market Economy 29
I. Generation and value creation 29
II. Finance 29
III. Organisations and ownership 30
IV. Information 30
V. Regulatory, fiscal, legal and other conditions for extending the social economy 30
D. Social Innovation and the household 31
I. Public spaces for social innovation 31
II. Valorising household time 31
III. The New Mutualism 32
IV. Constructed households as sites of innovation 32
Work in progress – circulated for comment 19
V. Social Movements 32
Section 2 ‐ The Process of Social Innovation 33
I. Diagnosis, design, and development 33
a) Triggers and Inspirations 33
b) From symptom to cause: problem identification, awareness, assessment and reformulation 34
c) Imagining solutions 35
d) Trial and Error 35
II. Sustaining innovation 35
III. Scaling, diffusion and connecting 36
IV. Systemic Innovation 36
Section 3 ‐ Transformative Social Innovations 38
I. Innovation in systems of prevention 38
II. The Support Economy 38
III. Complexity and Flow 39
IV. Green systems 39
V. Markets for the Marginalised 39
Work in progress – circulated for comment 20
Section 1
Conditions for an innovative social economy
This section covers some of the key enablers for social innovation – the background
conditions, funding flows and institutions that support the emergence of new ideas in the
four sub economies of the social economy, illustrated by the shaded area in the diagram
below: the public, grant, market and household economies. We examine these sub
economies one by one
A. The Public Economy
I. Public Finance: methods to generate internal innovation
A key to transforming the conditions for encouraging the generation and adoption of
innovation within the public sector and through its procurement, grants and investment
programmes is a change in the tax relationship, in public budgeting and in the structure of
financial accountability. Where the sources of funds and accountability shift from upwards
to outwards there is greater scope for innovation and for the prompting of innovation.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 21
a) Changing the tax relationship
1. Voluntary taxes, such as those introduced in Bogotá, Columbia but also including
Community Pledgebanks, public subscriptions, lotteries, and competitions.
2. Local bonds, including Tax Increment Financing (TIF) and Business Improvement
Districts (BIDs).
3. Quasi Currencies and environmental permits, such as Packaging Recovery Notes and
emissions trading but also including targets, rewards and penalties.
4. Hypothecated taxes and obligations for households and corporations, such as the BBC
license fee, London Congestion Charge, Climate Change Levy or Extended Producer
Responsibility as in British Columbia.
5. Socialising risk: new forms of social insurance for, for example, long term care, to
create incentives for providers to develop innovative solutions which will reduce
demand for services.
b) Budgetary practice to promote internal innovation
6. Top slicing departmental budgets for innovation.
7. Dedicated innovation funds and internal public venture funds, including the UK’s
‘Invest to Save’ budget for cross‐cutting innovations and The Enterprise Challenge in
Singapore.
8. Outcome based budgets which can be used to promote innovation including cross
cutting outcome based budgets such as those for Sure Start.
9. Ring fencing financial gains from innovation for initiators and developers.
10. Innovation‐related pay such as institutional, team and personal performance bonuses
linked to innovation.
c) Distributed accountability and democratic innovation
Work in progress – circulated for comment 22
11. Participatory budgeting, where citizens define local priorities and allocate public
money accordingly, including the experiences of Ontario, Canada and Porto Alegre,
Brazil.
12. Large scale government‐led exercises to involve the public in generating ideas and
possibilities, such as the Australia 2020 process initiated by Prime Minister Kevin
Rudd in 2008.
13. Citizen petitions. The German parliament now encourages citizen online petitions.
The petitioners who receive the most support get the chance to discuss their ideas in
parliament – requiring radical innovation to parliamentary procedure (see
www.zebralog.de).
14. Parliamentary structures to develop citizen ideas, like Korea’s Tribunis Plebis a
committee of senior legislators committed to putting ideas into legislation.
15. Methods for participation and ideas generation and deliberation such as the
methods promoted by AmericaSpeaks, as well as Deliberation Days, Consensus
Decision‐Making, Fishbowls.
16. Online petitions – such as the No 10 website in the UK which allows citizens to
petition the Prime Minister.
17. ‘Open’ Government including open forms of consultation and participation such as
the New Zealand Police Act wiki.
18. Ideas and imagination Banks – to draw in public ideas for improving public services
(for example Seoul Metropolitan government launched its Imagination Bank in 2006
and in 2007 received 74000 proposals, 140 per day. All have to receive a reply within a
week. 1300 were adopted wholesale and many others partially).
19. Processes for involving children in generating innovations, decision‐making, urban
design, planning, school management &c.
20. Opt out rights for communities to design and run their own services.
21. Audit and inspection regimes which overtly assess and support innovation.
22. Open source auditing as a mechanism for public accountability.
23. Tracking the public finances, including public balance sheet accounting and the
example of transparency of public finance in Estonia.
24. User feedback on service quality, including web based models such as
patientopinion.org.uk and Iwantgreatcare.org that hold service providers to account,
or the Kafka Brigades in the Netherlands.
25. ‘Open Politics’, including online platforms such as MoveOn.org and MeetUp.org
which mobilise and galvanise grassroots support for political parties.
d) A public medium of exchange
26. Direct payments and personal service budgets, such as the UK’s In Control, which
enable people to choose, arrange and pay for their own care and services.
27. Personal public accounts for credits and debits such as the Danish Nemkonto Easy
Account. Here, Danish citizens and companies nominate one of their bank accounts as
their Nemkonto Account into which all payments to and from public institutions are
transferred directly. Such accounts would enable the design of new public products,
including loans and payments.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 23
28. Smart cards, for example an extended version of the Oyster Card which would enable
innovation by connecting service users with multiple providers and by enabling
improved data flows.
29. Transaction charges and payments, including fees, variable charges, penalties,
rewards, discounts, and hypothecated fees for services by the state such as the
transportation, waste and local food transactions scheme in Curitiba, Brazil.
e) Public investment, loans and means of payment
30. Hybrid financing and joint ventures such as the finance models used by Woking
Borough Council and the London Climate Change Agency (LCCA) to develop
sustainable energy programmes.
31. Differential tax, credits, allowances and estate duties for personal public
investment, such as those for higher education, elder care and environmental
investment.
32. Valorising public investment by internalising public returns for example,
Community Land Trusts.
33. Financial instruments for preventative and service investment including the UK
‘Invest to Save’ budget, the US Justice Re‐Investment programme and contingent
revenue bonds such as the proposed Social Savings or Social Impact Bonds.
II. Public labour: redesigning the labour contract
34. Public sector unions as sources of innovation but also to promote and accelerate its
adoption. Examples include the Fire Brigades Union in the UK which helps firemen
find part time employment as benefits advisors alongside their roles as firemen.
35. Front line workers as innovators such as the nurses as social entrepreneurs
programme developed at Oxford University’s Saïd Business School.
36. Tithes of working time to generate collaborative public innovation, an extension of
the Google model whereby staff spend one day a week developing their own projects.
The parallel in the public sector could include making it easier to take sabbaticals to
work on socially innovative projects.
37. Incentives for successful innovation, such as pension increments for proven
innovation.
38. Secondments of public sector employees into skunk works, innovation teams and
projects to develop service innovation.
39. New professional definitions to promote service innovation to include, for example,
intramediaries (such as nurse intramediaries in Birmingham who connect promising
ideas to existing public service structures), intermediaries and innovation managers.
40. New funding and management methods which separate project failure from
redundancy including a move from project to career employment terms and
conditions.
41. Accreditation, search and recruitment of public innovators by commercial head
hunters or government agencies.
42. Innovation experience as a requirement for public advancement and formally
integrated into the appraisal process.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 24
43. Formation and training for public innovation, through, for example bodies like the
National School of Government (NSG) and the Improvement and Development
Agency for local government (IDeA).
III. Organisational forms
a) Internal
44. Individuals such as innovation champions and intrapreneurs, or individual
consultants working as sole traders.
45. Specialist innovation units, including skunk works.
46. In house innovation and spin off teams, including, for example the Innovation Unit
in the UK or Mindlab in Denmark which was set up by the Ministry of Economic and
Business Affairs, the Ministry of Taxation, and the Ministry of Employment to bring
together government, private enterprises and the research community under one roof
to promote user‐centred innovation.
47. Quality circles to drive continuous improvement (widespread in manufacturing,
increasingly used in private and public services).
48. Innovation agencies such as the NHS Institute for Innovation and Improvement in the
UK.
49. Public venturing such as the venture capital fund to promote green technologies
being considered by the Indian government.
b) Brokers & intermediaries
50. Intermediaries such as Innovation Xchange in Australia and the Innovation Exchange
and Innovation Unit in the UK.
51. Mobile innovation units including specialised consultancies or service design
agencies such as RED at the Design Council.
52. Innovation accelerators such as NESTA’s Public Services Innovation Laboratory.
53. Inside/outside grant administration and commissioning bodies such as
Futurebuilders which offers financial support to third sector organisations to deliver
publics services.
54. Bridging foundations such as NESTA and Edge that aim to connect research and
practice.
55. Sector specialist institutions and academies such as WRAP and sectoral training
colleges.
c) Professional collaboratives
56. Communities of practice (cf. 73) that bring together practitioners in formal mutual
learning.
57. Service collaboratives, such as health collaboratives.
58. Professional action learning groups such as the Innovation Unit’s Next Practice
model.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 25
IV. Metrics and assessment
59. Operational metrics, such as those for statistical production control to spot emergent
problems as prompts for innovation, including the example of renal treatment in the
US.
60. Comparative metrics, including benchmarking to identify sources for learning.
61. Financial metrics including granular metrics of conventional methods and services.
62. Social and environmental metrics including, Social Return on Investment (SROI),
methods for measuring Social Impact and cost/benefit analyses.
63. User oriented and generated metrics such as the sousveys used to gather chronic
disease data in Sheffield and metrics geared to self‐monitoring such as those used by
Activemobs in Kent.
64. Cross government innovation metrics, such as the Government Innovation Index
developed by the Government of South Korea to measure current levels of innovation,
and the results of new innovation.
65. Multi‐stakeholder dialogue and other forms of stakeholder assessment.
66. Assessment as learning, including peer reviews and real time evaluation methods to
promote cross‐pollination such as NESTA’s evaluation of Health Launchpad.
67. Mission guardians, golden shares and independent reporting.
V. The circuit of information
68. Integrated user centred data such as Electronic Patient Records in the UK.
69. Electronic data bases, such as the Electronic Court Records for King County,
Washington.
70. Search services for user and professional accessibility, including platforms such as
NHS Direct.
71. User generated feedback systems and response, including, for example,
fixmystreet.com and petitions.number10.gov.uk.
72. Citizen led traffic planning such as the use of web tools for changing travel patterns.
73. Practitioner networks and communities of practice, such as those organised by the
Improvement and Development Agency for local government (IDeA).
74. Information brokers, editors, intermediaries and scouts to search out and highlight
innovative practice.
75. Engaging contributors and recipients in service innovation such as the work
undertaken by design consultancies like Think Public, Participle, Live Work and RED
at the Design Council, or the Hope Institute’s citizen teams around public service
improvements (cf. 194).
B. The Grant Economy
Transforming the conditions for encouraging the generation and adoption of innovation
within the grant economy requires new kinds of finance, platforms, packages of support,
Work in progress – circulated for comment 26
and regulatory, governance and accountability frameworks. There is a key role to be played
by government and charitable foundations in re‐shaping these structures.
I. Generation of Innovative projects
76. Competitions for technology ideas, including Innocentive, X prizes, The Big Green
Challenge and NESTA’s Innovation Challenge in Mental Health.
77. Open Source soliciting of ideas for strategy, projects and grantees, including Ashoka
Changemakers, the Case Foundation’s Make It Your Own Awards, the Nevada
Community Foundation and the Omidyar Network.
78. Community Angels for project generation, such as those supported by A Glimmer of
Hope in Austin, Texas.
79. Ideas banks like the Global Ideas Bank and the Hope Institute’s many methods for
engaging citizens in promoting ideas.
II. Finance
a) Grant giving
80. Direct funding for individuals, including the grants given by UnLtd, The Skoll
Foundation and Ashoka.
81. Fast grants such as those distributed by the Sobrato Family Foundation.
82. Donor platforms, such as Kiva, GlobalGiving, Donors Choose, Altruistiq, Network for
Good, Brazil’s Social and Environmental Stock Exchange.
83. Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) such as Do Something or Teach for America.
84. Creative destruction: term limited charities and spending down assets, such as the
John M. Olin Foundation.
85. Competitions, prizes and challenge funds such as the Community Development
Fund’s Grassroots Grants programme in the UK.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 27
86. Grant allocation through public voting, such as the ITV/Big Lottery Fund competition
‘The People’s 50 Million’.
87. Grant recipient circles.
88. Micro grants for R&D for concept development and prototyping.
89. Grants as investment including tapered grant funding, public equity and preference
shares.
90. Grants as complements to innovation investment packages. Grant funding for off
balance sheet expenditure, for example Cordaid’s investment and development
packages for commodity development projects, or the UK’s DFID Frich grant
programme for UK market development for African supply chains.
91. Inverse tapering: grant growth based on performance.
92. Endowment finance such as the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the
Arts (NESTA) in the UK.
93. Social innovation partnerships: tax holidays and contributions in kind.
b) The grant relationship
94. Intermediaries for contributions in kind: labour and skills matching for volunteering,
such as the Taproot Foundation’s Service Grant program which provides not‐for‐
profits with pro bono marketing, human resources and IT consulting services.
95. Philanthropic eBays: philanthropic platforms such as Volunteer Match.
c) Purchasing and commissioning
96. Outcomes based commissioning.
97. Procurement as collaborative venturing: promoting disruptive innovation through
public procurement.
98. Collaborative procuring for search, diversity, prototyping and scale.
99. Public contracting methods that enable small scale and innovative commissioning
and sub‐contracting.
100. Pre‐finance of service innovation development.
101. Contestability and multiple providers to promote diversity of innovation.
102. Exploratory service contracts to ensure overt funding of innovation discovery.
103. Secure service contracts as a basis for collateral.
104. Independent progress review bodies as safe ‘holders’ of innovation
d) Investment
105. Investment guarantees with future year payment of guarantees such as the Sheffield
model.
106. Public venture funding (cf. 7 & 49)
107. Public investment aimed at social innovation growth strategies such as the Social
Investment Bank, the Toronto Atmospheric Fund and Enterprise Boards.
108. R&D tax credits for the design and development of innovations.
e) Mission driven investment
Work in progress – circulated for comment 28
109. Venture philanthropy, focused on innovation in particular sectors, such as the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation’s Pioneer Portfolio which specialises in health and IT.
110. Philanthropic mutual funds such as the Acumen Fund and the Global Fund for
Women.
111. Strategic investments to transform social sectoral provisioning, for example, the Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation’s investment in High Schools across America.
III. Packages of Support
112. Support services for innovators: mentoring, information and advice, connections and
networks, public visibility, such as Cleveland’s Civic Innovation Lab in Michigan and
the Social Innovation Generator in Toronto, Canada.
113. R&D mentored funding prior to start up lending, such as Mondragon’s Caja Laboral.
IV. Platforms, tools and protocols for innovation
114. Tools such as Diabetes Agenda cards that help people imagine innovative alternatives.
115. Interactive platforms including internal platforms such as intranets, external
platforms such as the BBC’s Community Channel, hosted chronic conditions networks,
the Open University and Enabled by Design.
116. Service infrastructure including digital spines.
117. Support services such as personal health and fitness coaches.
118. Found in translation: language facilities as sources of innovations for access and
service design.
119. Physical incubators and co‐housing to promote cross‐pollination such as the
Mezzanine in the UK and the Centre for Social Innovation in Toronto.
V. Governance and accountability
120. User and beneficiary representation on management boards, board champions for
innovation and pipeline reviews.
121. Innovation assessments commissioned by users and beneficiaries.
122. Members and associates as sources of innovation and review.
123. Metrics for venture philanthropy for example those developed by Homeward Bound,
a project to end homelessness in the US, or ‘blended value’ measures and Social
Return on Investment measures used for stakeholder communications.
VI. Regulatory, fiscal, legal and other conditions for extending the social economy
124. Planning and tax rules to promote creative economies such as subsidised rent in arts
districts including SoHo in New York.
125. Legal forms and requirements such as Community Interest Companies (CICs) and the
Charity Commission’s public benefit test.
126. Local public currencies such as the Wörgl in Austria during the 1930s, or more
recently, the Patacón in Argentina.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 29
127. New forms of property ownership: communities owning their assets such as the
Goodwin Trust in Hull, and Community Land Trusts, enabling new uses of land and
buildings.
C. Social Innovation in the Market Economy
I. Generation and value creation
128. Pro‐ams as social innovators.
129. Social markets such as Slivers of Time.
130. CSR and social uses of marginal business assets.
II. Finance
131. Micro credit for micro production. Grameen and BRAC in Bangladesh, and the
multiple versions of micro credit inspired by them, as well as much older traditions of
micro‐credit in Europe.
132. Planning gain and other devices for generating commercial funding for social value.
133. Social stock markets, the subject of an ongoing Rockefeller Foundation study (and the
Brazilian social stock market which provides an online platform linking donors with
projects).
134. Commercial investment aimed at social targets, such as Bridges Community
Ventures in the UK.
135. Bank‐based funding for social enterprises and not‐for‐profits including Banca
Prossima in Italy.
136. Philanthropic investment for growth such as the CAN Breakthrough Social
Investment Fund.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 30
137. Crowd funding. Myfootballclub.com as a web based co‐op to purchase and run a
football club.
(See also Purchasing & Commissioning 96 ‐104; Investment 105 ‐108 and Mission‐driven
investment 109‐111).
III. Organisations and ownership
138. Foundations as owners of corporations, such as the Bertelsmann Foundation and the
Robert Bosch Foundation.
139. Social enterprises, especially those with a strong asset base.
140. Businesses with social missions built into governance, such as Banca Intesa, the Co‐
op Bank and Welsh Water.
141. Extending the co‐operative economy in production, including the ‘Third Italy’,
Mondragon and Peruvian coffee co‐ops.
142. Consumer co‐ops, such as the Japanese food co‐ops.
143. Consumer shareholding as an instrument of social policy including, for example,
Cafédirect.
144. Social enterprise mutuals as aggregators of service provision from small social
enterprises such as WorkVentures.
145. Socialising intellectual property to meet social needs in the case of, for example,
AIDS drugs in Africa.
146. Social enterprise partnerships between corporations and not‐for‐distributed profits
such as Grameen‐Danone.
147. Corporate not for profit management of social provision such as Academy Schools in
the UK and Charter Schools in the US.
IV. Information
148. Improving market information to achieve social goals, such as better food labelling,
environmental performance ratings and carbon footprints.
149. Social marks and brands to secure a premium for social innovation, such as
‘organic’, ‘forest stewardship’ and ‘fair trade’.
150. Consortia for co‐operatives to search out innovative practice and support its
dissemination and adoption.
151. Social movement campaigns around corporate conduct (e.g. the Nestle baby milk
campaign, MacLibel).
V. Regulatory, fiscal, legal and other conditions for generating innovation in the social
economy.
152. Policy instruments to re‐make markets in order to promote the social economy such
as compulsory targets including the employment of people with disabilities,
regulations for renewable energy, fiscal measures and planning conditions.
153. Exemptions and assistance such as tax relief along the lines of the Enterprise
Investment Scheme (EIS) for social enterprises.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 31
154. Obligations and expectations including innovation focused CSR.
D. Social Innovation and the household economy
I. Public spaces for social innovation
155. Mobilising the street as a unit of innovation through concierges, guardians and
wardens.
156. Extending public spaces for domestic production such as allotments, parks, the new
doctor’s surgeries, street markets, community centres, internet libraries and street
festivals.
157. Reclaiming the streets and managing public spaces with multiple uses, such as the
‘Night for Women’ in Bogotá, Columbia, or car free periods in Canadian cities.
158. Protests through activity, such as guerrilla gardening, or reverse strikes such as road
building by the unemployed in Sicily.
159. Complaints Choirs – which gather groups of citizens to discuss complaints and turn
into lyrics and then perform as songs. The idea was first conceived in Finland; first
put into practice in Birmingham in England, and has now spread around the world.
There are for example 11 in Korea.http://www.complaintschoir.org/
II. Valorising household time
160. Recognising household time for social production by valorising voluntary work and
support through, for example, public tax credits, community commissioning and grant
supported projects.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 32
161. Inter household reciprocity and forms of exchange including time banks such as
SPICE, Local Exchange Trading Systems (LETS), local currencies and airtime as
currency.
162. Creating productive time, such as social sabbaticals.
163. Flexible terms of formal employment to enable a sustainable informal economy.
164. The volunteer economy. Organisation, training, meaning and incentives for
volunteers.
III. The New Mutualism
165. Enabling the informal social economy such as mobs and mutual support services,
local networks like freecycle or lift share networks such as liftshare.org.
166. The support economy: advising, coaching, mediating, supplementing and
communicating for household production. This could include educational coaching
service, relief and back up for home carers, health coaches, birthing and post birth
support and support teams for end of life care.
167. User groups such as rail user groups or park user associations.
168. Informal‐formal partnerships: such as Green Communities, a national network of not
for profit organisations developing and delivering innovative green solutions to
households and communities across Canada.
IV. Constructed households as sites of innovation
169. Residential communities for care and cure, for example moving beyond addiction at
San Patrignano.
170. Group services for networks of households, generalising the principle of sheltered
accommodation.
V. Social Movements
171. Social movements focused on lifestyle innovation and transformation, such as the
feminist and green movements but also including, for example, transition towns.
There is a key role for pioneers, the media and web‐based groupings.
172. Our Space: web based platforms for the household economy such as freecycle.org.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 33
Section 2.
The Process of Social Innovation
In these sections we set out some of the methods that are used for taking ideas through the
various stages that turn them from a creative spark to a practical possibility and then to a
large scale reality. In some, innovators work separately from those affected by innovations.
In others there is engagement with co‐creation, co‐design and ultimately co‐production of
new models.
I. Diagnosis, design, and development
The early stages of innovation involve creative leaps, new combinations of existing things
and pressures to change.
a) Triggers and Inspirations
Ideas come from many sources: theory, crisis, experience as well as formal methods.
173. Generative paradigms, ideas and concepts such as the concept of citizen‐reporters
and zero waste.
174. Learning by visiting which remains the most powerful tool for ideas transfer.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 34
175. Learning through crisis such as the clothing industry in Prato, Italy or New Orleans’
use of Hurricane Katrina to accelerate social innovation.
176. Innovation prompted by new knowledge such as lessons from neuroscience being
applied to childcare and early years’ interventions.
177. Innovation prompted by wasted assets such as the regeneration of the
Westergasfabriek in Amsterdam by ReUse.
178. Innovation prompted by intangible community assets such as positive deviance in
health and nutrition in Egypt and in North Lincolnshire schools or Stalker Lab’s work
with members of the Roma community in Italy.
179. Creative meeting formats such as open space, fishbowls &c, or the use of second life
for public conferences (such as One World’s parallel Bali conference on climate
change), or ‘Thinkathons’ involving thousands in ideas brainstorms.
180. Symbolic moves to foster innovative cultures, such as Tirana’s move to repaint
houses in vivid colours, Gateshead’s Angel of the North or the Waterfire in Rhode
Island.
b) From symptom to cause: problem identification, awareness, assessment and reformulation.
A series of other methods can then help to refine and develop ideas.
181. Beyond the hammer and the nail: methods for capturing user and producer
experience with multi‐disciplinary evaluation to co‐create diagnoses.
182. Ideas banks either within organisations or publicly as open spaces for people to
propose ideas. The Institute of Social Invention in the UK pioneered them and created
the online Global Ideas Bank which allows for comment and adaptation.
183. Complaints Choirs: social innovation through song such as Complaints Choirs in
Finland, Australia and Singapore.
184. User research including ethnographic approaches such as user/citizen diaries.
185. Identifying difference through market research, consumer categories and Psycho‐
social demographics.
186. Mapping the systems such as participative mapping and sectoral analysis, as
practiced for example in the Kerala People’s Planning Campaign.
187. Surveys and sousveys as vehicles of collaboration.
188. Making problems visible and tangible: statistical production control, research, video
interviews and artists in residence.
189. Engagement through action. Tools for users inviting reflection such as box recycling
schemes as prompters of environmental awareness and low income food box schemes
as vehicles for engagement in food and nutrition.
190. Learning through collaboration including international collaborative action networks
such as the Clinton Global Initiative and action research collaboratives such as the
Young Foundation’s work with local authorities on neighbourhoods and wellbeing.
191. University based innovation ‐ includes action learning within universities and
business schools such as the Innovation and Action Lab based in Brussels, developed
by i‐propeller and including the London School of Economics, Harvard Business
School, IESE Business School in Barcelona, SITE at the Stockholm School of Economics
and the Catholic University of Leuven.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 35
c) Imagining solutions
192. Creative thinking methods such as De Bono’s Six Thinking Hats and Lateral Thinking
and the work of What If?
193. Design methods such as brainstorming, visualisations, simulations and story boards
used by design consultancies such as IDEO, Participle, Live Work and Think Public.
194. Stakeholder methods including participatory design and Planning for Real.
195. Reviewing extremes such as health services or energy production in remote
communities.
196. Arts based methods such as those used by Mierle Laderman Ukeles at the New York
Sanitation Department, or the innovations in traffic management using mime artists by
the Mayor of Bogota
197. Continuous improvement methods such as Toyota’s performance management.
198. Hunting and gathering. Scanning alternatives and inviting solutions through, for
example, competitions and commissioning.
199. Thinkers in Residence such as those in South Australia and Manitoba.
200. A‐teams, young public servants commissioned to innovate solutions in South
Australia, alongside film‐makers and artists.
201. Innovation bazaars such as BarCamps and Innovation camps.
202. Cross‐cutting think tanks such as the Forum for the Future and do tanks.
203. Mass Collaboration such as the Open Source Software movement and Wikipedia.
204. Distributed Problem Solving such as Innocentive.
205. Tapping proprietary knowledge, for example, the Grameen‐Danone partnership.
d) Trial and Error
206. Fast prototyping methods which move quickly to test out a new idea either in a real or
partially real environment.
207. Slow prototyping methods which allow for more organic evolution of ideas and their
testing.
208. Formal pilots, such as randomised control trials (RCTs)
209. Tracking of non‐experimental survey data to identify patterns.
210. Real time process experiments, for example the application of just in time systems in
hospitals
211. Open testing such as the tracking of performance of different plug in hybrid cars
through Google, and C40 city governments.
212. Incubators and test beds to test alternative solutions.
213. Proof of concept testing and Beta testing.
214. Experimental zones such as enterprise, health and employment zones but also the
Power to Innovate.
II. Sustaining innovation
215. Business models identifying effective demand, income streams and asset value.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 36
216. Bell‐Mason methods from venture capital for systematically turning ideas into
sustainable business models
217. Building networks of allies with voice, power and money.
218. Demonstrating effective supply via evidence and value for money.
219. Collaborative alliances with consumers and users such as disability not for profits.
220. Maintaining and extending meaning to enable users to identify themselves as part of
a social movement. Examples include slow food and fair trade products.
221. Intellectual Property and intangible assets in order to generate income to support the
development of further innovations.
222. Organisational forms for sustaining innovation including consortia for technical and
market feedback.
223. Open Innovation as a new model for organising the production of information and
culture.
III. Scaling, diffusion and connecting
There are many methods for growing innovations – from organisational growth, through to
licensing and franchising to federations and looser diffusion. v
224. Scaling through organisational growth: issues of organisational size, structure and
process of continuous innovation.
225. Scaling through takeover by or of larger organisations.
226. Spin offs including associations, affiliations and federations and employee led spin
offs with continued links to the original hub.
227. Growth through people – i.e. putting an experienced manager in to run a new branch
while promoting their deputy to take over from them. This is usually more efficient
than franchising or recruiting a new team to run a new operating unit since the
experienced manager brings tacit as well as explicit knowledge.
228. Scaling through collaborative support. e.g. The Royal National Institute for the Blind
229. Social franchising such as the School for Social Entrepreneurs.
230. Licensing, such as Webster Stratton and their educational resources.
231. Diffusion through purchasing policy and technical support.
232. Brand awareness through kite marks and accreditation such as the ‘Organic’ and ‘Fair
Trade’ labels.
233. Replication within organisations as in the case of greening the Harvard University
campus.
234. Dissemination for collaboration and learning.
235. Diffusion through television and the new media for example Jamie Oliver’s school
dinners, or Castleford regeneration.
IV. Systemic Innovation
In this section we look at some of the conditions for more fundamental and systemic
innovation. Systemic innovation generally has to involve all four sectors, and slow
cumulative processes of change entailing changing infrastructures, behaviours and cultures.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 37
236. Strategies for systemic innovation, including the formation of progressive coalitions,
pre‐empting inflexible conventional technologies that freeze disruptive forms of
innovation, and accessing professional and other expertise for the contest of evidence
(for example the Schiphol airport noise campaign).
237. Self‐organising social movements for example the redesign of cities for those with
disabilities.
238. Creating new infrastructure, or adapting old ones, necessary for the expansion of new
systems (such as charging points for plug in hybrid cars, or local regeneration
networks for the distribution of heat, power and cooling).
239. Rewiring economies – promoting new supply or processing chains, for example
recycling industries to process secondary materials.
240. Technical innovations for key points in the chain – such as home medical testing
equipment or bio‐degradable plastic bags.
241. Service innovations for the new systems – support services (such as personal health
trainers or Ten UK’s support service for head teachers) new forms of finance and
insurance, or the creation of new service, repair, and training hubs like the new model
Applestores transposed to doctors’ surgeries.
242. Establishing working prototypes of the new system, for example the low carbon
housing in Hammarby Sjostad in Sweden, Vauban in Switzerland, and Bed Zed in the
UK.
243. Innovation academies embodying the new system principles for training, action
research and formation, such as the College of Health or Forum for the Future
244. Re‐calibrating markets through for example, fiscal and pricing regimes such as the
German feed‐in tariffs.
245. New legislative and regulatory architectures to unlock systemic change such as new
trading or building standards, or social and environmental performance requirements,
or new ways of handling value such as QALYs in health, valuations of carbon
reductions &c (cf. 124 ‐127; 152‐155).
Work in progress – circulated for comment 38
Section 3.
Transformative Social Innovations
In this section we look at some of the fields where fundamental social innovation is
underway bringing with it radically different models of organisation.
I. Systems of prevention
A common theme across many fields is more effective investment in prevention of problems
and waste.
246. Re‐inventing criminal justice, for example Oregon’s justice re‐investment
programme, Canada’s support circles &c.
247. Early years programmes such as the Abercedarian project and Sure Start providing
intensive support for children to reduce risk factors.
248. From waste to resources: reshaped systems for handling household and business
waste (prompting use of the idea of zero waste as a frame for rethinking economic and
social processes).
249. Healthy living and positive health, for instance Finland’s public health programme in
Karelia, and modern versions of the Peckham experiment to create holistic
environments for health.
II. The Support Economy
Work in progress – circulated for comment 39
250. Radical models for reshaping care for the elderly, combining new platforms,
combinations of professional and mutual support (e.g. the digital spine for
communication and service delivery in rural Maine).
251. Tenant self‐management and spin‐offs to deal with multiple issues facing tenants
(as with housing co‐ops in Canada).
252. Supported self‐care for chronic disease combining rich data feedback and support
structures such as innovations in the treatment of diabetes or multiple sclerosis.
253. New models of learning including peer to peer models such as the School of
Everything and digital learning environments such as colleges in second life.
III. Complexity and flow
254. Just in time in the social economy: queues, stocks and flows, for example the
transformation of hospital care in the UK.
255. Redesigning urban mobility: the experience of transport systems in Curitiba and
Paris.
IV. Green systems
256. The growth of distributed energy systems, Woking, wind power and neighbourhood
energy systems in Denmark and Manitoba, the rise of plug‐in hybrid vehicles.
257. From fork to table: social movements like slow food as innovators in the production,
preparation and consumption of food.
V. Markets for the Marginalised
258. The market turned upside down: Grameen’s social innovation through micro finance
259. Fair trade: from social enterprise to social movement, spreading to ever more product
fields.
260. Sustaining local economies through collaborative networks: co‐operative industrial
districts in the Third Italy.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 40
END NOTES
i Mulgan, G. (2006) ‘Social Innovation: what it is, why it matters, how it can be accelerated.’ London:
Basingstoke Press; Mulgan, G. (2007) ‘Ready or Not? Taking Innovation in the Public Sector
Seriously.’ NESTA Provocation 03. London: NESTA.; Mulgan, G., Ali, R., Halkett, R. and Sanders, B.
(2007) ‘In and Out of Sync: The challenge of growing social innovations.’ NESTA Research report.
London: NESTA; Bacon, N., Faizullah, N., Mulgan, G., & Woodcraft, S. (2008) ‘Transformers: How
local areas innovate to address changing social needs.‘ NESTA. Research report. London: NESTA.
ii Toffler, A. (1980) The Third Wave, Collins: London
iii Jim Maxmin and Soshana Zuboff, The Support Economy: Why Corporations are Failing Individuals
and the Next Episode of Capitalism, Penguin 2004
iv The question of how labour can be quantified and compared, and thus allocated socially, is one of
the central themes of classical economics. From Smith to Marx there was agreement that the
comparability took place indirectly through the exchange process, although there was a core debate
about the relationship of labour and value. The German philosopher Alfred Sohn Rethel later used
the term ‘commensurability’ to characterise this problem of comparability, and for him the striking
development of the 20th century was the development of Taylorism, and the direct commensurability
of social labour through time measurement. This was the basis for the planning of mass production,
but also has clear relevance to those areas of the economy that lie outside commodity exchange – in
particular many areas of the public sector. See A.Sohn Rethel, Intellectual and Manual Labour,
Macmillan, 1978, Chapter 31.
v Mulgan, G., Ali, R., Halkett, R. and Sanders, B. (2007), ‘In and Out of Sync: The challenge of growing
social innovations’, NESTA Research report, NESTA, London.
Work in progress – circulated for comment 41
NESTA is the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts ‐ a unique and
independent body with a mission to make the UK more innovative.
We invest in early‐stage companies, inform and shape policy, and deliver practical
programmes that inspire others to solve the big challenges of the future.
Our independence and ability to work across different sectors allows us to bring together
ideas from a wide range of perspectives. And because we can take a longer‐term view, we
are able to assume a greater burden of risk than others.
NESTA does not work alone. Our success depends on the strength of the partnerships we
form with innovators, policymakers, community organisations, educators and other
investors. We bring the best ideas, new flows of capital and talented people together, and
encourage others to develop them further.
For more information, visit www.nesta.org.uk
The Young Foundation is a centre for social innovation based in London, with a 50 year
track record of success in creating new organizations ‐ public, private and non‐profit ‐ as
well as influencing ideas and policies.
The Launchpad team creates innovative new organisations in health and education. The
Local Innovation team works on practical projects involving neighbourhoods, wellbeing and
the future of cities. The Research team studies the dynamics of social innovation and
changing needs. We work locally around our base in east London, throughout the UK as
well as internationally.
The Young Foundation was launched in 2005, but builds on a long history. Its predecessor
organisations under Michael Young were responsible for far‐reaching innovations ranging
from the creation of the Open University and Which? to the School for Social Entrepreneurs,
as well as pioneering research on changing patterns of community and family life.
For more information, visit www.youngfoundation.org