Chapter 1
The History and Domains
of Social Marketing
This area in Soweto, South Africa, experiences multiple challenges in housing, health,
sanitation, and employment. Picking the right approach to addressing complex problems
is part of social marketing practice. (Image courtesy of the author.)
Learning Objectives
 Describe the nature of wicked problems and how they are different from other
types of problems.
 Identify five actions that demonstrate an organization may have adopted a market-
ing orientation or approach.
 Distinguish the ways in which social marketing evolved differently in develop-
ing and developed country contexts.
 Discuss influences from the academic marketing discipline that have guided the
development of social marketing practice.
 Explain how service-dominant logic can influence how we think about exchanges
in social marketing practice.
THE CHANGE WE NEED: NEW WAYS OF
THINKING ABOUT SOCIAL ISSUES
One definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over again but
expecting different results. One of the key questions I will continually be asking
you to think about in one way or another throughout this book is, can we
continue thinking about and trying to solve social and public health issues using
traditional paradigms and tools, or will applying a marketing orientation aimed at
social innovation lead to original and improved solutions?
Coping with the many challenges confronting our own communities and
countries, as well as those that transcend national boundaries, requires the
development of new ways of thinking about and acting on them. Economic and
policy initiatives are only partial solutions to issues as diverse as safer neighbor-
hoods, childhood obesity, and poverty. Education and information campaigns
can go only so far in reducing the use of tobacco products, increasing the use of
preventive health services, and engaging parents in their children’s education.
Laws and regulations improve the safety of our food supply, reduce environ-
mental pollutants, and protect against unintentional injuries involving all types of
consumer products—yet they too are only partial solutions.
You may just be learning about these and other types of environmental,
health, and social problems. Or you may already be in a position to try to figure
2  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
out what to do about one or more of them. Better yet, you may have been
working in the social change arena for some time now and you may have a
personal appreciation of the definition of insanity that makes you feel the need to
innovate, to do something differently. Whatever your level of experience, this
book is for all of you who are what Bill Easterly calls searchers: you want to
understand what the reality is for people who experience a particular problem,
find out what they demand rather than only what can be supplied, and discover
things that work. You see adapting solutions to local conditions as more
important than applying global blueprints, and you value people’s satisfaction
with the offered solution, not how well crafted the plan was and whether it
received all the necessary resources (Easterly, 2006, pp. 5–6). Most of all, you
have a bottom-line philosophy that you want to experience results that make you
feel your life has been well lived. You have a hunger for doing something creative,
amazing—something that will make a difference and perhaps change the world—
and for being able to enjoy your work and someday look back and say, “Yes, I did
that!” (MacLeod, 2011, p. 9). I propose to each of you that by reading this book,
studying it, and trying out some of the ideas in your own work, you will become a
better searcher and be better able to satisfy some of that hunger.
The use of marketing principles and practices in the private sector has been
demonstrated to be among the most important tools for solving the core business
problem of achieving organizational success (generating profits) through satisfy-
ing consumer wants and needs. Marketing goes beyond advertising and sales.
When applied as intended, it becomes a systematic way for management to
structure its relationships with consumers and stakeholders, from the products and
experiences it offers, the structure of the incentives and costs associated with those
products and experiences, and their accessibility, to how they are promoted in
the marketplace with an ever-expanding palette of communication tools. This
same marketing management approach should be adopted in the analysis, plan-
ning, implementation, and sustaining of programs aimed at social problems. We
need to consider our particular environmental, public health, or social issue as our
core business issue, or passion if you like. To solve it we must consider how people
we work with, and serve, will also be satisfied. Thus, unlike other social change
approaches—and indeed, unlike the view some people have of social marketing
that mischaracterizes it as a top-down (or command-and-control) approach to
and philosophy of change—the core of the marketing discipline is achieving
social goals by meeting people’s needs, helping them in solving problems, and
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  3
enabling them to achieve their aspirations for themselves, their families, and their
community.
Social marketing, the application of the marketing discipline to social issues
and causes, provides a framework for developing innovative solutions to social
problems that have long perplexed and frustrated society. It has emerged from
business marketing practice as a social change tool uniquely suited to achieve
social profits by designing integrated programs that meet individual needs for
moving out of poverty, enabling health, improving social conditions, and having
a safe and clean environment. Marketing principles are embedded in such success
stories as the Positive Partnership Program’s work to enable poor people who are
HIV positive in developing countries to earn a sustainable income (Melnick,
2007), the reduction in teenage smoking rates resulting from the truths Cam-
paign (Farrelly, Nonnemaker, Davis & Hussin, 2009), the improvement in
children’s food choices and what they eat in schools through Team Nutrition
(Lefebvre, Olander & Levine, 1999), and the reduction of childhood deaths from
malaria through the distribution of insecticide-treated mosquito nets in endemic
countries (Schellenberg et al., 2001). Indeed, when we examine some of the
better known and successful public health programs over the past three decades,
the principles of social marketing are being applied by agencies around the world,
including the US Agency for International Development and the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention in the United States, the Department for
International Development in the United Kingdom, the Department of Health
in England, KfW Entwicklungsbank in Germany, the Public Health Agency of
Canada, the Canadian International Development Agency, the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs in The Netherlands, the Ministry for Health and Ageing in
Australia, and The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria,
among others. Social marketing is embedded in national health promotion and
disease prevention strategies in Australia (Commonwealth of Australia, 2010),
England (Department of Health, 2011), and the United States (US Department
of Health and Human Services, 2010).
To begin to understand how marketing applies to any specific environmental,
health, or social issue you can think of, consider that individuals in most societies
do not live solely in an economic marketplace in which monetary transactions
for goods and services reign supreme and rational decision making is believed
to be the norm. Instead, people’s everyday lives include exposure to all types of
ideas and behaviors, whether transacted directly with their family and friends or
4  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
vicariously through television and the Internet. The recognition that these
marketplaces of ideas and behaviors also exist, and that they are subject to such
forces as proximity and access, incentives and costs, role models and social norms,
health and digital literacy, and the quality of their communication environment,
illuminates how programs that focus on only economic levers or education or
laws and their enforcement fail to achieve all the social good that is intended.
Similarly, understanding that both individual change and social change are the
result of a marketplace of ideas and behaviors that are, in turn, constantly being
shaped by the activities of public, private, and civil society actors means also
understanding that all of these actors must become part of sustainable, long-term
solutions and not merely minor players in short-term campaigns—if they are
engaged at all.
Social marketing was developed as a method to achieve broad change among
populations and to have a positive impact on people’s health and well-being. It
is aimed at achieving social impact through the application of marketing con-
cepts and techniques to social issues ranging from the prevention, detection, and
treatment of diseases to environmental sustainability and social justice. It is not a
theory of behavior change but rather a systematic approach to thinking about and
solving the wicked problems our world faces. This chapter considers the question of
why organizations might use social marketing. It then traces the development of the
discipline as it evolved in developing countries as a practical approach to solving
public health issues, and in developed countries as an academic discipline that grew
around an interest in the intersection of marketing and society and in a practice
aimed at different types of public health concerns. The chapter ends with a dis-
cussion of some of the latest developments in the marketing discipline and the new
ways they offer to think about how we can use marketing for improving the welfare
of people and advancing social good.
WICKED PROBLEMS AND THEIR SOLUTION
In many disciplines the dominant model for defining and solving problems
features a scientific-rational approach that assumes every problem is definable,
understandable, and consensual (that is, everyone can agree on the causes and
proposed solutions). This approach has worked quite well in many cases involving
developing mass transportation, preventing infectious diseases, providing clean
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  5
water and sanitation, and improving access to health services (though there is
clearly a need to further improve access and equity for all people everywhere).
Rittell and Webber (1973) distinguished between these tame problems, with clear
causes and solutions that can be achieved by these deductive approaches, and
wicked problems, which are diabolical in their ability to resist the usual ways of
resolving problems. A wicked problem involves complex issues and defies com-
plete definition, its stakeholders have different ideas about what the real problem
is and what the solution is, there is no final solution, and given that any solution
will generate further issues, that solution is merely the best that can be done at
that time. For example, the Australian Public Service Commission (APSC)
(2007) notes in its publication Tackling Wicked Problems: A Public Policy Per-
spective, that issues as diverse as climate change, obesity, indigenous disadvantage
(disparities between native populations and majorities), and land degradation are
complex, or “wicked,” policy problems (see also Batie, 2008; Brown, Harris &
Russell, 2010; Kreuter, De Rosa, Howze & Baldwin, 2004): “Usually,” the
commission says, “part of the solution to wicked problems involves changing
the behaviour of groups of citizens or all citizens. Other key ingredients in solving
or at least managing complex policy problems include successfully working across
both internal and external organizational boundaries and engaging citizens and
stakeholders in policy making and implementation. Wicked problems require
innovative, comprehensive solutions that can be modified in the light of expe-
rience and on-the-ground feedback. All of the above can pose challenges to tra-
ditional approaches to policy making and programme implementation” (p. 1).
From my perspective this statement offers a compelling rationale for using
social marketing approaches: they are important for improving social welfare, the
well-being of people, and the health of our planet. It also propels the idea that
social marketing can and should look beyond behavior change because this is not
its only contribution to social change (whether achieved through communication,
incentives, or policy). This statement also underscores that single solutions will
not form foundations for true and lasting solutions (if indeed such solutions are
even possible).
The APSC identified three ways to address wicked problems. The first is
through authoritative (or top-down) strategies in which a group or individual
takes on the problem and all other stakeholders agree to abide by its decisions.
This group or individual may be an expert, be significantly positioned in a
bureaucracy or hierarchy, or have coercive powers (such as a court or regulatory
6  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
agency does). While these solutions might be efficient and timely, this group or
individual may not bring a broad perspective to the issue and its proposals might
alienate stakeholders, who then offer only tepid commitment to implementing
the proposed solutions.
The second approach to addressing wicked problems is through competitive
strategies in which stakeholders follow a win-lose search for power, influence, and
market share. Though such competition can result in innovative approaches to
solving wicked problems, excessive consumption of resources in the struggle and a
stalemate if no group emerges a clear winner are significant disadvantages.
The third solution, the one supported and endorsed by the commission in
its report, as well as by social change agents around the world, is the collaborative
CHARACTERISTICS OF WICKED PROBLEMS
 Wicked problems are difficult to clearly define.
 They have many interdependencies and are often multi-causal.
 Attempts to address wicked problems often lead to unforeseen consequences.
 Wicked problems are often not stable (they are often continually moving
targets).
 They usually have no clear solution (since the problem itself is not definitive
or stable).
 They are socially complex.
 Wicked problems hardly ever sit conveniently within the responsibility of
any one organization.
 Wicked problems involve changing behavior.
 Some wicked problems seem intractable and are characterized by chronic
policy failure (that is, they continue to present themselves despite many
attempts to address them, sometimes over decades).
Source: Adapted from the Australian Public Service Commission, 2007.
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  7
model. This model has been found to be the most effective in dealing with wicked
problems. In the collaborative model, power is dispersed among many stake-
holders, part of the solution lies in behavior changes made by stakeholders and
citizens, and there is a win-win view of problem solving (in contrast to the
competitive win-lose view). The collaborative approach will increase transaction
costs and can sometimes lead to conflict and stalemate as well. But the advantages
are that more comprehensive and effective solutions are generated with broader
support for their implementation.
These three approaches are not mutually exclusive, nor is the finding that
the collaborative approach is often better meant to imply that the collaborative
approach is always better. What the ASPC stresses is that the textbook approach
of defining a problem and progressing through an orderly and linear process to
understand it, gather the evidence and analyze the data, consult with stakeholders
and partners, identify objectives, design an intervention, and assess performance
targets is an inadequate way to think about wicked problems. The social context
and complexity of wicked problems means that linear thinking will be inade-
quate; it cannot deal with the interactivity and uncertainty of the causal factors,
policy objectives, and possible solutions. The linear problem-solving process is
more suited to laboratories, where many “extraneous” variables can be removed or
controlled for in the analysis and solution. The fact that wicked problems have a
social context highlights the need to reach out and engage stakeholders and others
in scoping the possible causes of and solutions to problems, and not just to pretest
options with these groups and individuals.
You can think about the difference between tame and wicked problems as
similar to the difference between mathematical problems and jigsaw puzzles. A
mathematical problem has one correct answer, and our job is to learn how to
solve the problem using the one approach that leads to the one correct answer. A
puzzle, however, starts with a mess of pieces in the middle of the table with no
clear end in sight and no clear place to begin. Puzzle solvers have to start
somewhere, but any piece might do. As they become more proficient, puzzle
solvers learn how to frame the puzzle first (start with the pieces that have straight
edges) and put together elements of the puzzle separately as the pieces seem to fit.
But the greatest insight into solving a puzzle comes from knowing what it will
look like when it is completed (that is, having the picture of the completed
puzzle). Having this picture of the future in mind as we start solving a puzzle
allows us to use what Martin (2009, p. 65) refers to as our abductive reasoning
8  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
skills: imagining what could be and then taking the steps to make that picture
come to life. Indeed, when one reviews how collaborations succeed or fail, a
common ingredient of their success is the ability of all the participants to create a
shared vision of what the future will look like under different scenarios. (Imagine
several people sitting around a table full of puzzle pieces, and each person has a
different picture of what the pieces will ultimately form. How do you think that
process will unfold?) As you begin this book, take some time to think about what
the future might be like from your point of view or from the perspective of your
organization. If you imagine the future, you can begin to change it.
Linear models for solving problems are not relevant to most social issues of
our time. Wicked problems require innovative and flexible solutions, yet most
programs are locked into highly regimented and prescribed step-by-step processes
that might work for people doing experiments or changing a discrete behavior for
a while but that have little validity in the messy world we live and work in. Social
marketing, as I will demonstrate in this book, provides a framework for and a
variety of approaches to solving environmental, health, and social puzzles (and the
tame problems too). Yes, we can continue to pick around the edges of issues such
as overconsumption, climate change, tobacco use, malaria control, poverty, and
obesity with what worked in the past for different types of problems—but only at
the risk of becoming inconsequential to real change. Or we can start thinking
about using social marketing as a planned approach to social innovation. Another
way of thinking about social marketing is as the application of marketing prin-
ciples to shape markets that are more effective, efficient, sustainable, and just in
advancing people’s well-being and social welfare.
WHY USE SOCIAL MARKETING?
There are a number of ways this book could address the question of why we should
use social marketing. It could refer to a number of review articles documenting
social marketing’s positive impact on a wide variety of health problems, some-
thing I will return to later. But spurring you on to learn why social marketing is
so important will, I presume, require something much more relevant than an
academic presentation.
Among many professionals who use social marketing in their public health
and social change work, the parsimonious answer to why is this: social marketing is
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  9
a systematic management process for the strategic allocation of resources to address
large-scale health and social problems.
Indeed, among commercial organizations, nongovernmental organizations
(or NGOs, a term I will use to refer to all not-for-profit, civic society, voluntary,
and other groups not controlled by either corporate or government interests), and
public sector (governmental) organizations, the adoption of a marketing orien-
tation is considered an essential component of modern economies (Shoham,
Ruvio, Vigoda-Gadot & Schwabsky, 2006). Shoham et al. (2006) note two broad
approaches to defining a marketing orientation. The first is the generation of
market information that is disseminated and responded to across the organiza-
tion. An analogue for many social marketers would be the epidemiological and
research studies that are widely known and used across their agencies.
The second approach to defining marketing orientation is where many
organizations fall short: using an approach that is also customer and competitor
focused and is coordinated across the organization’s functions. That is, scientific
data and various types of community assessments are transformed into programs
that are responsive to customers’ needs and lives, take into account the activities
of other organizations and a variety of competitive forces in the environment that
could impede or facilitate progress toward socially beneficial goals, and are
coordinated across organizational functions and program areas. To expand on this
latter point, a social marketing orientation is not represented by the mere exis-
tence of a social marketing officer or department. A social marketing orientation
is a systematic and pervasive approach to leveraging an agency’s resources to
achieve broad-based social change in the service of public health, environmental,
and other socially beneficial goals. The tension that a marketing orientation
exposes is balancing the scientific evidence and data with the subjective per-
spectives and insights of people in real-world contexts (cf. Sutton, Balch &
Lefebvre, 1995).
The adoption of a marketing orientation has been well researched among
private sector organizations, where it has been found to enhance employees’ sense
of belonging and feelings of making worthwhile contributions to achieving
organizational objectives. These effects are subsequently seen in higher levels of
teamwork, in organizational commitment, and in a sense of esprit de corps
(Shoham et al., 2006). In an analysis of 1,589 NGOs in Australia, New Zealand,
Spain, the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States, Shoham et al. (2006)
10  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
found a positive correlation between adoption of a marketing orientation and
higher ratings on performance measures. Interestingly, the effects of adopting
a marketing orientation on subsequent performance were more pronounced
among NGOs than among for-profit firms and were greater in non-US coun-
tries where the marketing orientation, even in the private sector, is relatively
underdeveloped.
Dearing et al. (1996) provide more specific answers to the question of why
use social marketing from a study they did among twenty organizations that
conducted HIV prevention programs in San Francisco. Interviews with repre-
sentatives from each agency found that social marketing concepts and strategies
were used in 62 percent of the programs (see table 1.1 for terms and definitions of
the key concepts and strategies).
At the time of this research, San Francisco was both an epicenter for HIV
infection and one of the most successful cities in sharply reducing new infections.
Dearing and his colleagues found that staffs who were more effective in con-
ducting HIV prevention programs developed them with “eyes wide open” with
respect to data gathering ahead of time (environmental scanning), segmented
their high-risk audiences (rather than lumping them together as one priority
population), used marketing principles to develop programs and as a way to
allocate agency resources (marketing mix, or 4Ps, approach), and conducted
research and evaluation through the life cycle of the project. These are concepts
and strategies that will repeat throughout this book.
So why use social marketing in your program or organization? Four reasons
form themes that will come through in this book:
1. To facilitate value for individuals, sponsoring organizations, stakeholders,
and society in meeting their individual and collective objectives.
2. To integrate evidence-based practice, social-behavioral theory, and insights
from people we seek to serve into effective programs and offerings.
3. To design more effective, efficient, sustainable, and equitable approaches in
order to enhance public health and social welfare.
4. To facilitate scalable change among individuals, organizations, social net-
works and social norms, communities, businesses, markets, and public
policy.
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  11
TABLE 1.1 Selected social marketing concepts and strategies found to result in
more effective HIV prevention programs
Descriptive
term
Definition Examples
Environmental
scan
A means of understanding the
nature and extent of the problem as
well as external influences that may
affect intervention viability and
effectiveness.
Use epidemiological data to identify
demographic groups at highest risk
for contracting HIV.
Develop an understanding of state
government funding priorities and
targets.
Audience
segmentation
A means of identifying subgroups
that share specific characteristics
useful for designing program
offerings. These subgroups are
referred to as priority groups.
Focus not on all at-risk persons for
HIV infection as one group but
specifically on young, African
American, male injection drug users
who are homeless and work in the
sex industry, for example; or focus
on Native Americans, on
acculturated versus recent
immigrant Latinos, on gender
orientation, or on women:
“We only approach kids who are
homeless and shoot up.”
“You cannot just provide AIDS
prevention to women. It’s absolutely
meaningless. . . . I have worked on
outreach projects where we really
didn’t treat the women any
differently than the men. We might
as well have just stood out in the
street and ripped up the money.”
Marketing mix The practice of tailoring offerings to
each segment or subgroup, using
the 4Ps approach:
Product—the physical items,
services, and behaviors offered by
the organization and its partners.
Price—the financial, psychological,
social, opportunity, and other
incentives and costs associated with
“We designed our kit to be
discrete enough to fit into one’s
pocket.”
“We can’t ask our clients to do that
yet.”
“Everything is provided free of
charge.”
“We have found bus shelters to be a
good place for ads because people,
12  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
WHAT IS SOCIAL MARKETING?
In its most elemental form, social marketing is the application of marketing prin-
ciples and techniques to foster social change or improvement. Examples of some of
these applications are related to active living communities (Maibach, 2003),
disaster preparedness and response (Guion, Scammon & Borders, 2007; Marshall
et al., 2007), ecosystem and species conservation (Boss, 2008; Jenks, Vaughan &
TABLE 1.1 (Continued)
Descriptive
term
Definition Examples
using the product or service or
engaging in the behavior.
Place—the distribution of products
and services so that they are
available and accessible to the
priority groups. Also ensuring that
opportunities and places are
available to try and then support
new behaviors.
Promotion—the communication
strategies and tactics that are aimed
at increasing awareness, attitudes,
perceived norms, self-efficacy, and
intentions to try program offerings
(the products, services, and
behaviors that are suggested;
cf. Fishbein & Yser, 2003).
while waiting for their bus, have
something to read.”
“We act on the principle that peer
relationships are the only things
that work.”
“And the more marginalized you
are, the more important it is that
people be like you when they
approach you for any reason. So the
men who work in our outreach
program are all gay or bisexual men.
Most are in recovery themselves so
they understand what those issues
are about.”
Formative,
process, and
outcome
evaluation
A systematic analysis of program
offerings before final development
and implementation (formative
research), distribution and uptake by
priority groups of program offerings
(process evaluation), and effects of
offerings on targeted behavioral
outcomes, disease, or mortality
(outcome evaluation).
“We took three designs of the
brochure into the streets to see
what the kids (priority group)
thought of them.”
“We gave away more than 10,000
brochures last year.”
“Six months after our program
started, we recorded a 15 percent
decrease in shared needle use.”
Source: Dearing et al., 1996.
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  13
Butler, 2010), environmental issues (Geller, 1989; Maibach, 1993), development
of volunteer or indigenous workforces (Boehm, 2009; Roncarati, Lefebvre &
Carleton, 1989), financial literacy (Lee & Miller, 2012; Lusardi, Keller & Keller,
2008), global threats of antibiotic resistance (Edgar, Boyd & Palamé, 2009),
government corruption (Kindra & Stapenhurst, 1998), improving the quality of
health care (Chang et al., 2007; Shaller et al., 2003), injury prevention (Smith,
2006), landowner education (Tyson, Broderick & Snyder, 1998), marine con-
servation and ocean sustainability (Bates, 2010), patient-centered health care
(Evans & McCormack, 2008), public health challenges (Grier & Bryant, 2005;
Ling, Franklin, Lindsteadt & Gearon, 1992), reducing health disparities
(Williams & Kumanyika, 2003), sanitation demand (Jenkins & Scott, 2007), sus-
tainable consumption (Peattie & Peattie, 2009), transportation demand manage-
ment (McGovern, 2005), water treatment systems (Mintz, Bartram, Lochery &
Wegelin, 2001), and youth gambling problems (Messerlian & Derevensky, 2007),
among other social needs.
The use of social marketing in public health programs is common. Over
fifteen years ago Glanz, Lewis, and Rimer (1997, p. 29) found social marketing to
be among the most frequently cited theories or models used among the 497
intervention studies they reviewed. Social marketing is not only a popular
framework for many people who work in public health and related fields but
also, as I noted earlier, has become part of national strategies aimed at improving
public health and social welfare. Canada was among the pioneers in this regard.
The Social Marketing Unit was created in 1981 as part of the Health Promotion
Directorate of Health Canada. Its chief aim has been to develop multifaceted social
marketing campaigns “to inform, educate and encourage Canadians to make pro-
active changes in their behaviours for the betterment of themselves, those they care
for and for their community” (Mintz, n.d.). In the United Kingdom, the National
Social Marketing Centre was created in 2006 to support the implementation of
social marketing programs in all health promotion activities of the National Health
Service. As French (2009) noted with respect to this development: “Social market-
ing represents an attractive approach to tackling behavioral issues for governments
because it sets out a transparent technical approach based on evidence and insight
generation, which is subsequently tracked and evaluated and modified as required.”
In Australia, social marketing approaches were included in that country’s National
Preventative Health Strategy (Preventative Health Taskforce, 2009), designed to
tackle obesity and the use of alcohol, illicit drugs, and tobacco.
14  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
In December 2010, the US Department of Health and Human Services
released Healthy People 2020, a document that set out the national objectives for
preventing disease and promoting health for the next decade. For the first time,
these objectives included increasing social marketing in health promotion and
disease prevention. Healthy People 2020 sets these specific objectives:
 Increase the proportion of State health departments that report using
social marketing in health promotion and disease prevention programs.
 Increase the proportion of schools of public health and accredited
master of public health (MPH) programs that offer one or more
courses in social marketing.
 Increase the proportion of schools of public health and accredited
MPH programs that offer workforce development activities in social
marketing for public health practitioners.
Notable examples of the surge in interest in social marketing outside the field of
public health are the recommendation of the Australian Institute of Criminology
(Homel & Carroll, 2009) that social marketing principles should be applied to
crime prevention, and the identification by the Worldwatch Institute (2010) of the
social marketing approach as a way of transforming cultures from consumerism to
sustainability. Indeed, as social marketing is coming into its own (even as some
people misappropriate the term by using it to describe social media marketing, or
marketing through web-based social network sites), it is common to find references
to social marketing in requests for proposals and other types of procurements
from government agencies for both domestic and international projects, social
marketing divisions and departments in leading advertising and public relations
agencies, and nonprofit and private agencies devoted to applying social marketing
to social problems and behavior change programs (cf. Andreasen, 2002).
A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
The history of social marketing is usually told from the marketing, or academic,
perspective in developed countries. This tradition overlooks the international
contributions to the development of social marketing; it also omits an essential
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  15
dynamic of social marketing. That dynamic is the tension between the practi-
tioners who continue to push the practice of social marketing to solve numerous
health and social puzzles and the academic marketers who debate whether these
applications fit their definitions of social marketing (Lefebvre, 2011a).
The development of social marketing has followed two routes. The first one
can be traced through business systems and related academic research beginning
in the early 1900s, when economic theory diversified from an exclusive focus on
production and the creation of economic value to also include distribution and
regulatory systems and the marketing of products (see Wilkie & Moore, 2003, for
an extensive review of these developments). Over the next decades, marketing
became increasingly concerned with its relevance to managers and managerial
functions. By the late 1960s, scholars began exploring the extension of marketing
beyond commercial applications in order to address the needs of nonprofit orga-
nizations, educational and cultural institutions, and the planning of social change
programs (Kotler, 2005). Throughout the evolution of the marketing discipline,
the interface of marketing with social issues has been of interest; marketing
has also been deeply involved with the consumerism movement (cf. Bloom &
Gundlach, 2001a). Since the 1980s, marketing scholars have increasingly spe-
cialized according to their interests, levels of analysis, and research methods. Social
marketing has evolved into an identified subgroup that focuses on social issues
along with public policy, marketing ethics, macromarketing, consumer economics,
and international consumer policy (Wilkie & Moore, 2003).
The second route for the evolution of social marketing came out of the
challenges confronting public health and social change practitioners around
the world. In many cases managers of public health and social change programs
were instrumental in searching for innovative answers to age-old problems.
They were also among the seekers of more effective and efficient ways to
implement large-scale public health and social welfare programs. It is from this
perspective that we continue the story.
The Beginnings of Social Marketing Practice
Phil Harvey (1999) provides a rich narrative describing how Peter King and his
colleagues responded to the Indian government’s desire to reduce population
growth in India in the mid-1960s (when there were more than twelve million
births each year). It was clear that with too few doctors and with clinics
16  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
concentrated in urban areas, any program that could make a dent in persuading
over 500 million citizens to use birth control would have to go beyond traditional
medical practices. Knowing that the government lacked the expertise to create a
demand for family planning and also the distribution system to make family-
planning products (such as condoms, intrauterine devices, and birth control pills)
widely available, King and his colleagues at the Indian Institute of Management
seized on the idea of promoting and distributing family-planning products
through commercial rather than medical networks. Proposals for Family Planning
Promotion: A Marketing Plan (Chandy et al., 1965) laid out the essential ideas for
the social marketing of contraceptives, with sections of the proposal titled
Conducting consumer research
Sourcing the products
Branding and packaging
Advertising and promotion
Distribution
Pricing
Cost-benefit analysis
Although both the Indian government and foreign donors responded favor-
ably to the plan, government agencies had to be reorganized to support and
manage such an extensive marketing effort. After that reorganization a pilot
project was carried out for approximately two years, distribution companies were
lined up, advertising agencies were identified and funded, and nearly 400 million
identically produced and packaged condoms were made by six manufacturers
and delivered to the Indian government. It was not until 1968 that the Nirodh
condom marketing program was finally launched. Early evaluations of the project
found that the social marketing, community-based distribution model was more
cost effective than clinic-based distribution activities in terms of couple-years of
protection offered per dollar of investment and that there were higher utilization
and less wastage of condoms through free as opposed to paid distribution
channels (Black, 1976; Talwar, 1979).
Phil Harvey and Tim Black took the ideas of the Nirodh project and applied
them in Kenya. It was at this time that Harvey rejected the idea that gratitude was
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  17
part of a helping marketing exchange with people who wanted family-planning
products, commenting, “I would never be comfortable providing help to people
in ways that suggested they should express gratitude. . . . I found such rela-
tionships demeaning, and yes, immoral” (Harvey, 1999, p. 18). Rather, Harvey
and Black focused on developing commercial transactions for condoms and other
family-planning products in which prices were set at nominal levels. Most often
the full costs of the program, including advertising, promotion, distribution, and
management were subsidized through donor grants and contracts (Harvey, 1999,
pp. 1–25). Harvey described his and Black’s contraceptive social marketing
(CSM) approach as informing people about the advantages of birth control
through mass media efforts as well as other communication channels, educating
people about specific methods, and offering low-priced contraceptive brands.
A key feature of these early social marketing approaches is the central
importance of a product that could be offered in a commercial and tangible
exchange with people. The principle of offering tangible products for some
payment, however minimal, has been extended to many types of commodi-
ties including other family-planning products, oral rehydration solutions, and
insecticide-treated bed nets (ITNs). This conceptualization and practice of social
marketing has both critics and defenders (see, for example, Curtis et al., 2003;
Lengeler, Grabowsky, McGuire & deSavigny, 2007). In response to criticism and
the changing realities of the public health marketplace in developing countries,
many practitioners of the CSM model have embraced behavior change and ser-
vice delivery models as necessary to accomplishing their health missions. For
example, behavioral interventions and voluntary HIV testing clinics now com-
plement CSM programs, and are also used independently, for HIV/AIDS pre-
vention. Significantly increased funding for and supplies of ITNs and long-lasting
insecticide-treated nets (LLINs) through the Global Fund and many donor
organizations and countries has made it more feasible to distribute them at no
cost to prevent malaria (cf. Brugha, 2001; Curtis et al., 2003).
Beyond Contraceptive Social Marketing
Another pioneer in the application of marketing techniques to social issues in
developing countries was Richard Manoff. In his wide-ranging book Social
Marketing: New Imperatives for Public Health (1985), he stated: “Social marketing
is more than research, product design and distribution, diffusion of information,
18  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
or the formulation and implementation of a communication strategy. It may
include introduction of the new product (e.g., oral rehydration (ORT) salts), the
modification of existing ones (e.g., iodized salt), restricted consumption of others
(e.g., cigarettes, infant formula), and promotion of structural change in existing
institutions (e.g., food stamps, hospital practices). Social marketing may be
exclusively educational (e.g., sodium reduction) yet still be obliged to do mis-
sionary work with food companies for sodium-reduced products” (pp. 50–51).
In contrast to the social marketing work described by Harvey (1999), which
centered on family planning, Manoff’s portfolio had a much more diverse set of
public health issues, including antidiarrhea campaigns, nutrition programs,
immunization campaigns, food supplementation products, and increasing the
prevalence of breast feeding. These experiences led him to talk about the social
marketing product as an innovation that solves a problem for a consumer or
“requires the adoption of a new behavior” (Manoff, 1985, p. 108; emphasis added).
Indeed, Manoff spent little time focusing on issues of pricing and distribution of
products. Rather, his belief was that “design of messages is the major task of social
marketing. When improperly executed, it can constitute social marketing’s critical
weakness” (p. 156; emphasis in the original). This focus on messaging, or com-
munication, has continued to be an organizing principle for behavior change
communication specialists in developing countries, as well as for many social
marketing campaigns in the developed world.
Harvey and Manoff describe two perspectives on social marketing that exist to
this day. On the one hand, Harvey represents the social marketing approach that
aligns with the commercial sector and in which tangible products, pricing,
brands, and distribution are core components. Manoff, on the other hand, pre-
sents an approach to social marketing that focuses on government and NGO
action, the use of mass media, and the designing and testing of messages as the
key task. Yet what is clear in both of their accounts is an unwavering focus on
understanding people, responding to their needs, and measuring success in terms
of meeting people-focused objectives, not production targets.
The Evolution of Social Marketing in Developed Countries
The practice of social marketing evolved in developed country contexts from a
more explicit academic lineage. Shaw and Jones (2005) identify the emergence of
the marketing management school in the 1950s and 1960s as a milestone event for
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  19
the marketing discipline. Many of the concepts social marketers now hold
dear—consumer orientation, audience segmentation, the marketing mix—were
introduced with the aim of addressing the question, primarily from the seller’s
perspective, of how an organization should organize and market its products and
services. It was in this vein that Kotler and Levy (1969) proposed expanding the
marketing concept beyond commercial businesses to include nonprofit organi-
zations. Lazer (1969) was simultaneously proposing the use of marketing man-
agement to achieve positive societal impacts in addition to helping to meet
business goals. It was with the backdrop of the social upheavals of the late 1960s
in the wake of the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr., the nascent interests in
environmental issues (Earth Day was first observed in 1970), and rising consumer
activism that Philip Kotler and Gerald Zaltman (1971) proposed and defined a
marketing approach to planned social change: “Social marketing is the design,
implementation, and control of programs calculated to influence the acceptability
of social ideas and involving considerations of product planning, pricing, com-
munication, distribution, and marketing research” (p. 5).
Since this definition first appeared, most authors in the field have neglected
both Harvey’s and Manoff’s work and have attributed the origins of social mar-
keting to this definition (see, for example, Andreasen, 1995; Lefebvre & Flora,
1988; Kotler & Lee, 2008; Donovan & Henley, 2003, 2010; and also table 1.2).
One notable exception to this trend is Hastings (2007, p. 9), who favors
the definition of social marketing prepared by Lazer and Kelley (1971, p. ix):
“Social marketing is concerned with the application of marketing knowledge,
concepts and techniques to enhance social as well as economic ends. It is also
concerned with analysis of the social consequence of marketing policies, decisions
and activities.”
If you look at the Kotler and Zaltman definition more closely, and compare it
to the definitions found in table 1.2, it is apparent that an enormous shift in
emphasis has occurred from using social marketing as a way of promoting ideas to
seeing it as a methodology for changing behavior. One reason for this shift lies in
the types of problems social marketing has been applied to in developed coun-
tries: the prevention, detection, and treatment of cardiovascular diseases and
cancers. Especially in the prevention arena, developing scalable approaches to
detecting and controlling high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol levels, and
breast cancer; reducing risk behaviors including cigarette smoking and eating
high-fat and high-calorie foods; and encouraging healthier behaviors such as
20  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
TABLE 1.2 Social marketing definitions, 1985–2010
Manoff, 1985 “Social marketing is the adaptation of marketing to public
health imperatives . . . it is a strategy for translating
scientific findings about health and nutrition into education
and action programs adopted from methodologies of
commercial marketing.”
Kotler & Roberto, 1989 “A social-change management technology involving the
design, implementation, and control of programs aimed at
increasing the acceptability of a social idea or practice in
one or more groups of target adopters.”
Andreasen, 1995 “The application of commercial marketing technologies to
the analysis, planning, execution, and evaluation of
programs designed to influence the voluntary behavior of
target audiences in order to improve their personal welfare
and that of their society.”
Kotler, Roberto & Lee, 2002 “Social marketing is the use of marketing principles and
techniques to influence a target audience to voluntarily
accept, reject, modify, or abandon a behavior for the
benefit of individuals, groups, or society as a whole.”
Donovan & Henley, 2003 “The application of the marketing concept, commercial
marketing techniques and other social change techniques
to achieving individual behaviour changes and social
structural changes that are consistent with the UN
Declaration of Human Rights.”
Smith, 2006 “A program management process designed to influence
human behavior through consumer-oriented decision-
making leading to increased social benefit.”
Serrat, 2010 (Asian
Development Bank report)
“Social marketing is the use of marketing principles and
techniques to effect behavioral change. It is a concept,
process, and application for understanding who people are,
what they desire, and then organizing the creation,
communication, and delivery of products and services to
meet their desires as well as the needs of society, and solve
serious social problems.”
Dann, 2010 “[T]he adaptation and adoption of commercial marketing
activities, institutions and processes as a means to induce
behavioral change in a targeted audience on a temporary
or permanent basis to achieve a social goal.”
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  21
leisure time physical activity led to solutions focused on changing behaviors to
improve health status.
Fine (1981) has been one of the few writers to acknowledge the importance of
ideas and social issues as products that are traded in a marketplace, which he referred
to as a “concept industry.” He saw the way ideas solve problems as similar to the
way that products satisfy needs and desires, and he demonstrated the application of
marketing to social issues such as increasing productivity in industry through
improvements in the quality of the labor supply, increasing and expanding ideas of
what constitutes safe driving, and reforming the education system. However, there
has been limited acceptance of the notion that ideas are the province of social
marketing (see Andresen, 2006). Instead, what occurred was the introduction and
acceptance of behavioral psychology into social marketing, beginning with Lefebvre
and Flora (1988): “Social marketing is an invaluable referent from which to design,
implement, evaluate, and manage large-scale, broad-based, behavior-change
focused programs” (p. 300).
Despite early calls for social marketing to be concerned with social and
population-based change, by Kotler and Zaltman (1971), Lefebvre and Flora (1988),
and Walsh, Rudd, Moeykens, and Moloney (1993), many definitions of social
marketing that emerged over the next two decades promoted a variation of the
theme of individual behavior change for the common good (see, for example,
Andreasen, 1995; Kotler & Lee, 2008; Siegel & Lotenberg, 2007). One outcome of
adopting this individualistic approach was the charge that social marketing is another
form of “blaming the victim,” a criticism leveled against programs that aim for only
individual levels of change and neglect social determinants and ecological models
of behavior, health, and well-being (Brieger, Ramakrishna & Adeniyi, 1986; Gielen
& Sleet, 2003; Wallack, 1989). Another consequence has been the allure of devel-
oping mass media campaigns in which persuasive appeals are aimed at individual
behavior change. As Wallack (1989) explains, these types of programs share certain
characteristics:
 Problems are conceived as primarily individual-level matters, and knowledge,
attitudes, and behaviors are analyzed and explored in order to create inter-
ventions to change them.
 Planners of these programs share the mass media fantasy that any social or
health problem can be addressed adequately so long as the right message is
delivered to the right people in the right way and at the right time.
22  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
 Approaches focus on individual choice and the responsibility to engage in
healthier or more prosocial behaviors, to the exclusion of broader social and
political contributions and influences.
A third and related effect of the focus on individual change has been that
few social marketing projects have attempted to influence social determinants
and social contexts, and projects have paid little attention to the development of
public policy approaches to market-based solutions (Lefebvre, 2011a; Marmot,
2004). In response to the restricted scope of social marketing programs, Lefebvre
(2009a) called for the recognition of social marketing as a social change tool for
achieving social profits. Hastings (2007) embraced the notion of social marketing
as a way to realize social goals and also to analyze the social consequences of mar-
keting policies, decisions, and activities. Similarly, Donovan and Henley (2003)
took issue with the prevailing individually focused efforts and saw “the primary
future goal of social marketing as achieving changes in . . . social determinants of
health and well-being” (p. 6). In their subsequent book Donovan and Henley
(2010) went further to describe social marketing as seeking to not only “inform and
persuade” people but also to “legislate” to achieve social goals when the evidence,
resources, nature of the problem, and prevailing norms allow it (p. 20; emphasis in
the original). As we move through this book, I will build on these ideas and unfold a
broader perspective on social marketing.
Other Marketing Influences on Social Marketing
Shaw and Jones (2005) identified several other marketing concepts that are rel-
evant to the development of social marketing thought, research, and practice and
that will form a context for discussions later in this book. These concepts are
described in the following paragraphs.
Marketing Systems
The marketing systems approach takes a systems-based orientation to marketing
issues, as opposed to the more functional approach of marketing management. It
had only a small and transitory following in the marketing discipline after it was
introduced, being superseded by the marketing management and consumer
behavior schools. Yet I believe that in our current environment, in which systems
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  23
thinking permeates new approaches to the complexities of addressing public
health and social issues (see, for example, Pearce & Merletti, 2006; Trochim,
Cabrera, Milstein, Gallagher & Leischow, 2006), social marketing can offer
unique and innovative solutions within a framework of marketplaces and market-
based systems. In chapter 2, I look at how marketing systems thinking can be
applied to the health information marketplace.
MAKING CONSUMER RESEARCH RELEVANT TO
SOLVING SOCIAL PROBLEMS
Transformative consumer research (TCR) is a movement supported by a task force
that was established within the Association of Consumer Research to encourage,
support, and publicize research that benefits quality of life for all people engaged
in or affected by consumption trends and practices across the world. Unlike many
academic groups that are content to accumulate knowledge about problems
through research and theoretical contributions, TCR scholars have the aspiration
to also apply this knowledge to helping to solve problems. They are also com-
mitted to keeping a clear focus on the “life world of consumers,” understanding
that such a focus is the way to achieve maximal meaningfulness, relevance, and
usefulness of their research—or what they term “practical wisdom.”
TCR scholars are being encouraged to descend from their ivory towers and
engage with social change agents through the adoption of five potential paths
to the improvement of consumer and environmental well-being. Pioneers on
these different paths might be involved with revelatory and incendiary research
to inspire widespread social interest and involvement, policy research that
aligns with key political decision makers, participatory research that partners
with people who are affected by the social problem being investigated, and
coalition research with organizations committed to alleviating the social prob-
lem. TCR may make substantive contributions to the work of social change. In
their search to fulfill their mandate to share their insights with all those who
can benefit from them, these TCR researchers, as well as others who confront
the challenges of disseminating results to priority groups, policymakers, and
practitioners, will benefit from applying many of the social marketing principles
addressed in this book.
Source: Based on Mick, Pettigrew, Pechmann & Ozanne, 2011.
24  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
Consumer Behavior
In social marketing the influence of consumer behavior research is reflected in the
selection and use of theories to guide the conceptualization of the problem,
determine goals, generate possible solutions, and design an evaluation. Health
promotion and social marketing rely heavily on psychological approaches, such as
the health belief model, theory of reasoned action, stages of change, and social-
cognitive theory (Glanz, Lewis & Rimer, 1997; Lefebvre, 2001). There has been
growing recognition of the value of incorporating other types of theories and
models into social marketing practice, including community-based models of
change (McKenzie-Mohr, 2011; Bryant et al., 2009) and social mobilization
(McKee, 1992); theories focused on social determinants, social capital, and social
networks (Lefebvre, 2011b); design thinking; and behavioral economics
(Lefebvre & Kotler, 2011). I will outline these models of consumer behavior in chapter 3.
Macromarketing
Micromarketing focuses on analyzing transactions at the individual or household
level—individual-level approaches in public health and social change can be
analogous to this commercial marketing approach. Macromarketers, in contrast, ask
questions about such things as the ways the marketing system affects society and
the ways society affects the marketing system. For example, Cummings, Morley,
Horan, Steger, and Leavell (2002), Grier, Mensinger, Huang, Kumanyika, and
Stettler (2007), and Hastings, Anderson, Cooke, and Ross (2005) note how
corporate marketing practices have significant impacts on smoking initiation
among teens, children’s consumption of fast foods, and young people’s drinking
of alcohol. And each of these consumer behaviors has an extraordinary influence
on the risk of morbidity and mortality from a variety of diseases that significantly
affect not only individuals’ and families’ lives but also the productivity of busi-
nesses, the economic cost of health care, and other costs to society, including the
lost opportunities when resources that could have gone elsewhere are directed
toward preventing these health behaviors and treating their consequences. Rather
than focusing on changing individual behaviors, the social macromarketer or
critical marketer studies how to reduce the influence of these types of corporate
marketing on behaviors and social norms and how to restructure marketing
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  25
systems to avoid the untoward consequences that society currently experiences
from these types of business activities. Indeed, when this discussion looks
later at the ideas of critical marketing and demarketing, we will see how these
larger questions can help to frame the types of questions and solutions social
marketers pose.
The Exchange Concept
The idea of exchange has evolved in marketing from the initial notion of two parties
exchanging tangible goods or services for money to the idea that a transaction can
consist of the exchange of anything of value between two parties—including
gossip, wedding vows, or text messages (Fine, 1981; Shaw & Jones, 2005). Ridley
(2010) has proposed that exchange is the foundation and driving force of social
evolution, as it has allowed specialization of skills and thus fostered interdepen-
dence among people that leads to the creation of markets of all kinds.
Some authors have identified the exchange concept as a core element of the
social marketing approach (Lefebvre & Flora, 1988; Hastings, 2007; Lee &
Kotler, 2011), whereas others have been silent on the question (Andreasen,
1995). Hastings (2007, p. 30) notes that in its essence an exchange relationship
must be one that is mutually beneficial to both parties. The exchange process, he
argues, does not have to be seen as one in which there is a “winner” and “loser”
(also known as a zero-sum outcome) but can be described as a situation in which
both parties achieve a win-win outcome by meeting consumer needs and orga-
nizational objectives (Lefebvre, 1992). Yet Hastings (2007) also acknowledges
that the exchange relationships most social marketers are confronted with are not
the more tangible economic ones found in the commercial marketing sector but
ones in which they are “forever selling unseen benefits such as not getting cancer
or avoiding a traffic accident” (p. 20). He avoids the more difficult issue of
delineating how an organization that sponsors a social change program imme-
diately benefits from a transaction (exchange) in which it is asking its clients or
stakeholders to change their behaviors by, for example, not smoking or not
texting while driving.
In contrast, Donovan and Henley (2010) consider the necessity of including
the idea of exchange in their definition of social marketing and conclude, like
Elliott (1991) before them, that it is not needed. Elliott notes the “intellectual
contortions” that are required to create exchanges in most social marketing
26  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
programs where adoption of new ideas and practices is the goal, not a reciprocal
transaction between two parties. As Lefebvre (1992) framed exchange: “Social
marketing involves consumers exchanging resources for new beliefs and beha-
viours . . . the strategy is to create an awareness among consumers that they
have a problem and then offer the solution” (p. 157). Lee and Kotler (2011)
simply noted that exchange occurs when members of the target audience perceive
that the benefits equal or exceed the costs they associate with performing a
behavior (p. 15).
Elliott’s point is that when exchange theory is offered as a mechanism for
a social marketing approach, it inevitably describes intrapersonal or internal
exchanges, such as occur when one gives up unhealthy behaviors in order to
achieve either short-term or long-term benefits. He suggests that the term match,
or fit, is more appropriate for social marketers to use for their programs (cf. Kotler
& Roberto, 1989, p. 28). That is, social marketing programs seek to match their
offerings with the realities of consumers’ lives. I agree with Elliott (1991) and
Donovan and Henley (2010) that the traditional notion of tangible exchange is
not of vital importance to social marketing thought or practice. And as Lefebvre
and Rochlin (1997) noted in their review, using exchange theory as an explan-
atory concept for behavior change has very little empirical support.
Service-Dominant Logic
The service-dominant logic (S-D logic) model has created much interest in aca-
demic marketing circles as an alternative to the classic exchange concept. It offers
an approach to thinking about social marketing that aligns with other shifts in
social sciences and social technologies (Lefebvre, 2007). The development of
S-D logic stemmed from dissatisfaction with the 4Ps framework (described as
“merely a handy framework” of managerial decision-making variables by Day
and Montgomery, 1999) and the traditional idea of exchange. Constantinides
(2006), for example, summarized over forty papers that have been critical of or
presented alternatives to the 4Ps marketing mix framework. The reasons the 4Ps
marketing mix and exchange frameworks have been found to be limited include
the following:
The producers of goods, services, and behavioral offerings rarely involve or
interact with customers in designing the marketing mix elements. The 4Ps
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  27
are decided upon by planners and managers, perhaps “tested” with cus-
tomer groups, and then “launched” at them.
Marketing activities have shifted from one-off transactions or exchanges to
dynamic and tailored interactions aimed at building relationships and
engaging with customers over longer periods of time.
The services that are becoming the primary drivers of economic activity have
characteristics—for example, people or participants, physical evidence (of
their value), and processes (of service delivery)—not addressed by the
traditional 4Ps.
Consensus is growing among academic and commercial marketers that the
4Ps marketing mix idea of forty years ago is no longer as relevant for
current markets, customers, or marketers. Some social marketers have
embraced these same concerns and issues (Hastings, 2003; Lefebvre,
2007; Marques & Domegan, 2011; Peattie & Peattie, 2003).
A different worldview of marketing is emerging, one that seems well suited to
social marketing programs. In a seminal article, Vargo and Lusch (2004) state,
“The purpose of marketing is to mutually serve.” These authors proposed the
concept of service-dominant logic to reflect a change in perspective from one that
sees value embedded in an organization’s offerings as value-added or functional
utility to one that appreciates that value is co-created in collaboration with people
formerly known as customers. The fundamental assertion of S-D logic is that all
exchanges are service based (see the following list). Because the classic analyses
of exchanges had focused on the immediate exchange of money for products
(a goods-dominant logic), the value the product provided to a person after the
transaction was completely ignored. What S-D logic shows us is that a tangible
(product) or intangible (service, behavior) offering has value only when a cus-
tomer “uses” it; that is, it provides a service by improving the condition or well-
being of the person in some way. A person does not buy a hammer for its
functional characteristics, for example, but for the value it provides in use.
Similarly, people are not going to behave differently because of “baked-in” or
persuasive benefits such as longer, healthier, or sexier lives. They will behave
differently when they find that using the new behavior (or ceasing to use an old
one) leads to what they define for themselves as value or a benefit.
28  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
THE TEN FOUNDATIONAL PREMISES OF
SERVICE-DOMINANT LOGIC
1. Service is the fundamental basis of exchange.
2. Indirect exchange masks the fundamental basis of exchange.
3. Goods are a distribution mechanism for service provision.
4. Operant resources (knowledge and skills) are the fundamental source of
competitive advantage.
5. All economies are service economies.
6. The customer is always a co-creator of value.
7. The enterprise cannot deliver value, but only offer value propositions.
8. A service-centered view is inherently customer oriented and relational.
9. All social and economic actors are resource integrators.
10. Value is always uniquely and phenomenologically determined by the
beneficiary (experienced in use) (Vargo & Lusch, 2008, p. 7, table 1).
S-D logic has at least five implications for social marketing in the future:
1. Instead of seeing exchanges as the giving of something for the receipt of
something else (value-in-exchange), as is understood in the application of the
goods-dominant logic model, we should view exchanges as a mutual sharing of
knowledge and resources among the social change agency, the priority group
of customers, and other actors or stakeholders. This process is referred to as the
co-creation of value-in-use.
2. S-D logic shifts us from a production or top-down orientation of trying
to create what we believe will be of value to people (that is, benefits) to a cus-
tomer perspective in which these people bring skills and competencies and
become co-creators of value. Each customer uniquely discovers and experiences
value when he or she uses our offering, whether it be a new behavior, product, or
service—value is not achieved through how creatively we “package” that offering
or how persuasively we “sell” it.
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  29
3. S-D marketing logic moves us away from a marketing-to approach to a
marketing-with perspective (Lusch, 2007). Using a marketing-with approach,
social change agents and organizations can continually learn about their customers
and markets and collaborate with them to create and sustain value for them and for
society. To facilitate long-term adoption of healthier and more sustainable beha-
viors, we need to focus on value-in-use, rather than one-off attempts at change.
4. Because we social marketers cannot create or produce value, we can only
suggest what the value might be; that is, we can offer value propositions: “We think
you may like this because it satisfies a need you are experiencing now . . . solves a
problem for you . . . facilitates your getting a job done . . . helps you reach a goal.”
Customers must then validate the proposition through their experience of behaving
differently, using the product, and engaging with the service in their daily lives.
5. Our role as change agents is to facilitate value creation; our clients or
customers are the value creators who must integrate what we are giving them
(Grönroos, 2011). This perspective on how value is created by users means we must
design interactions (or service touchpoints) to facilitate value-in-use and feedback.
This feedback, or exchange, can suggest how we might refine, augment, or change
our initial offering. And whether we are working with clients, customers, or stake-
holders, value is not intrinsic to participating; it must be continually created and re-
created in a collaborative and balanced fashion (Frow & Payne, 2011).
SUMMARY
Today’s many complex or wicked problems present opportunities for social
marketing to contribute to improving people’s health and well-being around the
world. Social marketing has developed along winding and intertwining paths in
marketing scholarship and public health practice, the fields where it has been
most extensively applied and studied. This has more often than not led to ten-
sions between the academic ideals and the practical applications and lessons
derived from them. It has also driven the different ways in which people think
about and practice social marketing in different parts of the world, as well as
around the corner from each other. For example, a classic 4Ps marketing mix has
often been translated into practice in developed countries as behavior change
through mass communication campaigns (or 1P marketing efforts); social mar-
keting in developing countries has been more focused on classic marketing ideas
30  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
(or goods-dominant logic) centered on product development, distribution, sales,
and branding. With these differences has come confusion over the definition and
domains of social marketing. We will explore the integration of these differences in
the next chapter. A variety of disciplines have also contributed to the development
of social marketing, and the domains where social marketing is practiced have
evolved from a primary base in public health to environmental concerns, injury
prevention and safety, financial literacy, health literacy, poverty alleviation, and
many other areas in which practitioners strive to improve the human condition.
In subsequent chapters, the historical perspective on how social marketing is
practiced will be balanced with new influences on social marketing thought and
practice. Key drivers of innovation in social marketing include shifting from
an individualistic to a social context for change efforts, adopting systems-level
and macromarketing perspectives, and reconceptualizing the role of exchange and
value creation in social marketing activities.
KEY TERMS
abductive reasoning
consumer behavior
contraceptive social marketing
environmental scanning
exchange concept
macromarketing
marketing
marketing management
marketing orientation
puzzle
searcher
segmentation
service-dominant logic
social marketing
transformative consumer research
value creation
value proposition
value-in-use
wicked problem
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Social marketing programs evolved in developing countries in part due to
underdeveloped, weak, or nonexistent commercial markets for family-planning
C H A P T E R 1 : T H E H I S T O R Y A N D D O M A I N S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  31
products. In developing countries, commercial markets work more efficiently
and effectively in making these products widely available at affordable prices.
How might the characteristics of commercial markets explain the social mar-
keting approach taken in developing countries? What challenges would progress
(that is, greater effectiveness and efficiency) in these markets pose to existing
social marketing programs—for example, as countries begin to transition from
least-developed to middle-income countries?
2. Many ideas about the causes of and solutions for a variety of social problems
are discussed and debated in the media, among politicians, in communities,
and on campuses. How might an idea that is currently being debated be better
marketed? How would concepts such as segmentation and the marketing mix
lead to strategies to have more people adopt the idea? Suggestion: break into two
or more groups and have each group take one side or one of the multiple per-
spectives of the problem and develop a social marketing campaign plan.
3. The practice of social marketing has been on a trajectory that started with
promoting tangible products and is now confronted with the challenge of
practicing service-dominant logic. How would an S-D perspective be dis-
ruptive to social marketing programs that focus on family planning, malaria
control, or HIV prevention? What changes would a social marketing orga-
nization need to make to become more S-D logic oriented?
4. Similarly, for organizations that have relied on communication and mass
media approaches to social change, how would adoption of an S-D per-
spective disrupt their current practices? What would be the relative advan-
tages and disadvantages for their constituencies, stakeholders, and staff of
becoming more S-D logic oriented?
32  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E



