Chapter 2
Principles of Social Marketing
This fresh fruit and juice vendor in Cartagena, Columbia, has a thriving business through
offering healthy choices to residents. (Image courtesy of the author.)
Learning Objectives
 Identify the essential components of social marketing programs.
 Describe organizational barriers to adopting social marketing principles, and
techniques and approaches for overcoming these barriers.
 Discuss the major ideas of three models for social marketing.
 Summarize how markets can be approached and influenced with social
marketing.
 Identify five examples of asymmetries in health marketplaces.
In this chapter I review theories and models that are being used in social
marketing. Many of the concepts in social marketing come from a managerial
perspective of marketing; that is, they help program developers to understand
a social puzzle and to design possible solutions to that puzzle using ideas such
as environmental scanning, segmentation, and the marketing mix, which were
described in the first chapter. Several social marketing models that can guide
the development of strategies and programs are highlighted, with particular
attention to an integrative model that begins with understanding and insight into
the value or benefits people perceive in our offerings—whether those offerings are
behaviors to engage in or discontinue, products to use, or services to access. This
chapter then extends the scope of social marketing to consider the marketplaces
in which our offerings are made, and ways to look at and influence various types
of market asymmetries that influence the larger context in which people live.
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SOCIAL MARKETING
As we saw in the first chapter, social marketing has been variously defined.
Another important discussion in the literature has arisen as practitioners and
researchers have worked to compile the characteristics of the social marketing
approach, especially those that distinguish it from other methods to achieve
behavior and social change. Table 2.1 illustrates some of the sets of characteristics
identified over the last four decades.
Several common features of a social marketing approach emerge from this
comparison. The most consistently described characteristics of social marketing
draw from managerial frameworks and approaches identified by Wilkie and
34  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
Moore (2003, p. 129) and include a consumer orientation, exchange and customer
value, market analysis and segmentation (also referred to as selectivity and con-
centration), the use of a marketing mix to develop and implement programs (this
mix includes products, pricing, place or distribution, and promotion or commu-
nication—collectively referred to as the 4Ps), various types of market or consumer
research to test and refine offerings, and monitoring and effectiveness evaluations.
Other features often found in programs in which product and service offerings, and
not just behaviors, are important elements of the marketing mix include
 A product life cycle
 New product development processes
TABLE 2.1 Characteristics of a social marketing approach
Kotler & Zaltman
(1971)
Lefebvre &
Flora (1988)
Walsh, Rudd,
Moeykens &
Moloney (1993)
Donovan &
Henley (2010)
French &
Blair-Stevens
(2010)
Environmental
scanning
Consumer
orientation
Planning Consumer
orientation
Customer
orientation
Define the change
sought
Voluntary
exchange
Consumer
analysis
Exchange Behavioral
goals
Segment the
market
Audience
analysis and
segmentation
Market analysis Customer value Theory-based
Marketing
research
Formative
research
Channel
analysis
Selectivity and
concentration
Insight
Product planning Channel analysis Marketing mix
strategy
Differential
advantage
Exchange
Pricing or costs Marketing mix Communication Use of market
research
Competition
Promotion or
communication
Process tracking Implementation Integrated
approach to
implementation
Segmentation
Place or
distribution
and response
channels
Marketing
management
Process
evaluation
Monitoring and
influencing
environments
Methods or
marketing
mix
Continuous
effectiveness
monitoring
Outcome
evaluation
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  35
 Physical distribution management
 Marketing information systems
 Product positioning
 Marketing audit
 Demand generation strategies
 Creative approaches and styles
 Brand development and management
HEALTH COMMUNICATION, SOCIAL
MARKETING, AND COCA-COLA
Students in health communication and public health programs want to
understand the differences between health communication and social mar-
keting. One day a student in my class carefully pointed out that social
marketing is the “backbone” of health communication because it leads com-
municators to segment their audience members, understand them, and then
focus on behavior change. “All of those things are true,” I said, “for any good
health communications program.”
What this student and others who are having these debates in classrooms
and staff meetings overlook is the marketing mix. As I described my take on the
differences between health communication and social marketing with a Coca-
Cola analogy, those differences became clear to her (or so she said). Here it is
for you to try on.
Health communicators are like the advertising agencies for Coke. Their job
is to understand the audience, create engaging and persuasive communication,
and deliver it in ways that raise awareness of the brand and lead to an increase
in product purchase behaviors. If a person sees a Coca-Cola ad and is thirsty but
can’t get to a store to buy a Coke, finds no Coke on the shelves when he or she
gets there, or sees that Pepsi is cheaper, or really prefers Diet Dr. Pepper, no
amount of advertising is going to fix the problem and stimulate purchase of a
Coke. And no advertising agency would dream of trying to do that (yes, it could
try to switch Pepsi or Diet Dr. Pepper drinkers to Coke drinkers, but that is an
expensive course of action).
36  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
Ever since Lefebvre and Flora (1988) first opened up the idea that behaviors
are an essential component of social marketing offerings, the view that behavior
change is a requisite activity of social marketing has been repeated by many
other commentators (Andreasen, 1995; French & Blair-Stevens, 2010; Kotler &
Lee, 2008). Yet behavior change is far from being a distinguishing feature of
social marketing anymore. In an era in which many health burdens are directly
linked to behaviors that people engage in, many other change agents also
claim behavior change as their ultimate criterion of success (Crosby, Kegler &
DiClemente, 2009; Institute of Medicine, 2001; Schiavo, 2007, p. 9; The
Editors, 2008).
Table 2.1 also reveals that some social marketing ideas surface less frequently
than others, such as incorporating behavioral theory and audience insight into
the design of social marketing programs; coming to an understanding of the
competition—the personal, environmental, and corporate factors that act against
the desired behavioral choices and goals (cf. Andreasen, 1995)—and then using
this understanding of competition to create differential advantages for social
In certain respects social marketers should be more like the staff in the
marketing department for Coca-Cola. The Coca-Cola marketers need to be sure
that the product line (behavioral choices for social marketers) has in it some-
thing for everyone—not one thing for everyone (even diet brands have to use
different artificial sweeteners to suit different people’s tastes). They then focus
on the distribution system so that anytime, anywhere, someone is thirsty a
Coke is within an arm’s reach of desire. Next they focus on the pricing side of
the equation, not only deciding what price a thirsty consumer will pay for a
Coke but also how much to charge for it relative to the offerings of other
beverage marketers (the competition) and when to have sales, send coupons to
people, run contests, and in other ways create incentives and promotions that
encourage people to buy Cokes. And only then do they worry about jingles,
furry polar bears in ads, and public relations activities.
A big difference in responsibilities and approaches manifests itself in too
many social marketers’ planning meetings—as soon as the brainstorming
begins, it’s all about the 4Ps of posters, pamphlets, public service announce-
ments, and publicity for communication, and not the 4Ps of marketing.
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  37
marketing offerings; monitoring and influencing the physical and social envir-
onments; and developing a marketing management system in which all elements
are resourced and coordinated (cf. Lefebvre & Flora, 1988).
Some people simplify the idea of social marketing to the use of principles and
practices of commercial marketing for behavior change to achieve noncommercial
(social) goals. Yet when we look more closely at how social marketing is used in
many countries, we find that it is focused on seemingly intractable behaviors and
wicked problems in complex economic, social, political, and technological cir-
cumstances with usually very limited resources. And the goal for governments,
NGOs, and other groups who strive to change these problems and conditions
goes beyond individual behavior change. If we assume that a primary responsi-
bility of marketers is to satisfy stakeholders who invest in these programs, the
bottom line for social marketers is to also meet society’s desire to improve
people’s quality of life (Serrat, 2010).
HOW CAN WE USE SOCIAL MARKETING?
As I noted before, when Kotler and Zaltman (1971) first introduced the term
social marketing into the literature, they defined it as using marketing to influence
the acceptability of social ideas. When Lefebvre and Flora (1988) later wrote
about it for public health programs, they focused on the uniqueness of social
marketing as a way to formulate and implement “programs that are developed to
satisfy consumer needs, strategized to reach as broad an audience as is in need of
the program, and thereby enhance the organization’s ability to affect population-
wide changes in targeted risk behaviors” (p. 302; emphasis added).
Since then, social marketing has also been suggested as a model for scaling up
effective programs (Lefebvre, 2011b), replicating and disseminating evidence-
based interventions (Dearing, Maibach & Buller, 2006; Harris et al., 2012),
developing innovative solutions to social problems (Lefebvre, 2011a), and
informing and supporting policy development (French, 2011; Marshall, Bryant,
Keller & Fridinger, 2006).
While social marketing promises to address many social problems in the
ways outlined in the last paragraph, a number of barriers typically stand between
an organization’s current operational procedures and adopting a marketing or
consumer-centered approach. The barriers that must be confronted and over-
come before an organization can apply social marketing include
38  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
 A lack of organizational consensus on the mission
 An inadequate understanding of people’s needs and perspectives on problems
 Pressures to place professional, policy, and scientific priorities above people’s
needs, wants, and aspirations
 Organizational and professional biases that favor expert- or evidence-driven
efforts
 Intermediaries and partners who may impose their own agendas on solutions
or modify and dilute consumer-based ones
 A lack of appreciation of marketing at top-management levels
 Perceptions that social marketing is manipulative or that marketing is immoral
 An insufficient awareness of research evidence and case studies showing
successes for social marketing
 A perception that social marketing lacks academic and professional stature
 A perception that social marketing is too expensive for organizations without
deep resources and technical capacities (to conduct research and evaluation
and develop products, for example)
 Organizational structures and other barriers that impede integrated marketing
approaches
 A belief that social marketing is incompatible with other approaches, such as
community mobilization, policy development, and media advocacy
 A reluctance to tamper with existing programs (Andreasen, 2002; Lefebvre &
Flora, 1988; Marshall et al., 2006; National Social Marketing Centre, 2009)
Andreasen (2002) and Marshall et al. (2006) have argued that in many instances
social marketing must be marketed before it can be practiced. We can debate why
after forty years such activities should still be warranted, or more profitably, we can
scan our internal marketplace and designate priority groups in order to create an
approach that uses social marketing strategies and tools to facilitate the adoption of
new behaviors. Marshall et al. (2006) present a framework for thinking about
how to market social marketing to three priority groups: (1) senior management and
boards of health, (2) community leaders, and (3) advocates and elected officials
and funders. As shown in table 2.2, these authors then specify the desired behaviors
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  39
we will want to increase among members of each group, the determinants of their
current behaviors, and suggested strategies to increase the acceptability of social
marketing to each group.
In arguing for a shift in how public sector organizations function, French (2011)
makes a cogent case for moving from an approach dominated by policy analysts and
TABLE 2.2 Priority audiences for the marketing of social marketing
Logic model
component
Resistance scenarios
“Big dogs” “Hard to reach” Not policy friendly
Target
audience(s)
Health officer, senior
management, boards
of health
Community advocates,
community leaders,
coalition members
Legislators, political
leaders, decision makers at
major funding agencies
Desired
behavior
Permission to use
social marketing
approach
Agreement to use
resources for
formative research
and audience
segmentation
Approve use of social
marketing approach for
developing community
interventions
Agree to use audience
segmentation instead
of hard-to-reach
paradigm
Accept use of social
marketing approach for
policy development and
implementation
Accept use of social
marketing approach in
applied research and
demonstration grants
Determinants
of audience
behaviors
Evidence of programs
that work, efficient
use of resources,
political acceptability,
makes agency look
good
Existing services come
first, experience with
previous research
projects, don’t leave
anyone out, programs
that work
Focus on policy, avoiding
service programs and
information campaigns,
successful policy
advocacy, analyzing
policy strengths and
weaknesses
Strategies
and/or
intervention
for behavior
change
Brief and orient
leaders, cite the
literature, use outside
experts, address
consumer wants,
evaluate components,
professional growth
opportunities
Step-wise approach to
segmented audiences,
asking people what
they want, respecting
people’s needs, involve
community leaders,
give people a “say”
Show how marketing
applies to policy advocacy,
compare social marketing
to systematic political
analysis, cite literature,
segment legislators, public
and media
Source: Marshall et al., 2006.
40  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
content experts to one that is also influenced by a deep understanding of priority
groups and their beliefs, values, and willingness to participate with others in gen-
erating solutions. This perspective echoes an earlier call by Sutton, Balch, and
Lefebvre (1995) to integrate scientific findings with an understanding of consumer
realities, rather than developing programs based solely on scientific evidence. Having
this blend of expert and citizen involvement in defining the scope of a puzzle and
generating solutions to it can lead us to collaborative and democratic approaches that
balance individual rights and responsibilities with broader social needs. Providing
the means to move in that direction is the heart of this book.
STRATEGIC SOCIAL MARKETING
French and Blair-Stevens (2010) made a useful distinction between the opera-
tional social marketing that is used to develop a specific campaign or program and
the strategic social marketing that is used to shape and craft policy options, define
desired outcomes, and design intervention strategies. Many texts, workbooks, and
online resources are available to help people develop an operational social mar-
keting campaign (see table 2.3 for examples). In this book I am going to focus
mostly on the strategic side of social marketing. The preparation and delivery of a
social marketing program aimed at a specific social or public health problem
among certain priority groups is a practice improvement for many groups. And it
is clear that no well-crafted strategy will accomplish its desired objectives without
qualified and talented people to design and implement program elements.
However, unless these individual programs result in changes in organizations’
operational procedures, approaches to policy development, and allocation of
resources for improving public health and welfare, and unless they create equi-
table and sustainable changes not just in behaviors but also in the social context,
environment, and markets that determine them and support them, they are
serving only as Band-Aids. As you progress through the book, you will be dis-
covering a broad perspective of social marketing that moves beyond behavior
change to include changes in organizations, communities, public engagement,
and well-being. The following sections of this chapter look at three models of
social marketing that provide a strategic framework around the concepts and
techniques we can begin to employ.
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  41
TABLE 2.3 Online resources for developing social marketing programs
and campaigns
Title Service Description URL
CDC: Gateway to
Health
Communication &
Social Marketing
This website contains resources for building
health communication or social marketing
campaigns and programs. Includes tips for
analyzing and segmenting an audience,
choosing appropriate channels and tools,
and evaluating the success of messages
and campaigns.
http://www.cdc.gov/
healthcommunication
CDC: Social
Marketing for
Nutrition and
Physical Activity
This web course provides training for public
health professionals in how to use social
marketing to plan nutrition, physical activity,
and obesity prevention programs.
http://www.cdc.gov/
nccdphp/dnpa/
socialmarketing/
training/index.htm
CDCynergy—
Social Marketing
Edition Version 2.0
This resource provides users with step-by-
step guidance for developing and
documenting a successful social marketing
program. The CD-ROM contains case studies,
commentary from experts in the field of
social marketing, tutorials for each stage of
effective program development, an extensive
resource library, and tips for managers who
oversee social marketing programs.
http://tangibledata.com/
CDCynergy-SOC/Drive-
thru/index.cfm
National Social
Marketing Centre:
Social Marketing
Award Course
This e-learning course provides an
introduction to social marketing, from basic
principles and terminology through more
detailed guidance on how to plan, manage,
and evaluate a behavior change program.
http://thensmc.com/
content/e-learning
The Open
University: Social
Marketing
This web course examines the nature of
social marketing, and how marketing
concepts, frameworks, and techniques
developed for commercial marketers can
solve social marketing problems for
organizations seeking to effect social
change or address specific social issues,
such as travel planning and health initiatives.
http://www3.open.ac.uk/
study/professional-skills/
course/gb017.htm
Tools of Change This website offers specific social marketing
tools, case studies, and a planning guide for
helping people to take actions and adopt
habits that promote health, safety, or
sustainability.
http://www
.toolsofchange.com/en/
home
42  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
Carrots, Sticks, and Promises
Rothschild (1999) views marketing as one of three sets of strategic tools, along
with education and the law, for the management of behaviors related to public
health and social issues. According to Rothschild, education involves efforts in
which information and persuasion are offered to influence behavior. Law involves
coercive practices to change behaviors in a nonvoluntary way, to threaten pun-
ishment for noncompliance or inappropriate behaviors, or to alter the market-
place for using healthy or unhealthy products and services or for engaging in
certain behaviors through price subsidies (to encourage more of them) or taxes (to
reduce them). He views marketing as attempting to manage behavior by offering
incentives and consequences in a context in which a person can voluntarily
choose to participate in the exchange, as opposed to being forced to comply
with it. In thinking about how people act in these three different scenarios—
education, marketing, and law—Rothschild stresses the importance of people
perceiving a self-interest (that is, a personal motivation or personal benefit) for
engaging in certain behaviors. He also notes that the environment in which social
marketing occurs is challenged by the presence of free choice, consumer apathy,
inertia, and competition—all of which serve to make a marketer’s job more
difficult. That is, people have many choices they can make: they may not be
interested in our offerings, they may have no intrinsic desire to change, or they
may be under assault by a variety of other people and organizations vying for their
attention and energy.
Against this backdrop, Rothschild (1999) proposes a strategic model for
public health and social issues management based on an information-processing
TABLE 2.3 (Continued)
Title Service Description URL
Unite for Sight:
Social Marketing
and Social
Mobilization in
Global Health
Online Course
This course examines social marketing and
social mobilization strategies in developed
and developing countries. Through the
evaluation of past successes and
failures, learners can discover how
to effectively motivate, involve, and
empower communities to improve
their health.
http://www
.uniteforsight.org/social-
marketing
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  43
model of advertising in which motivation, opportunity, and ability (MOA) are
the core constructs (cf. MacInnis, Moorman & Jaworski, 1991). As shown in
table 2.4, he uses the MOA approach to create eight strategies for behavior
change that are dependent on whether people do or do not have the motivation
to change or adopt new behaviors, whether they have opportunities available to
engage in the behaviors, and whether they have the requisite abilities to perform
the behaviors.
Once the problem is identified as, for example, having the motivation to
engage in new behaviors but lacking the opportunity to do so and also lacking the
required abilities (cell 6 in table 2.4)—the problem that might be faced by a poor,
urban-dwelling, middle-aged woman who would like to become more physically
active but has never done so—then education and marketing are proposed as the
desired behavior change strategies. This model makes three key assumptions:
1. Motivation will be increased slightly by education and moderately through
marketing. Law must be used when people cannot be motivated to act
voluntarily.
2. Opportunity can be created only through marketing and indirectly through law.
TABLE 2.4 A conceptual framework for using education, marketing,
and law to change social and health behaviors
MOTIVATION Yes No
OPPORTUNITY Yes No Yes No
ABILITY
Yes 1 2 3 4
Prone to
behave
education
Unable to
behave
marketing
Resistant to
behave
law
Resistant to
behave
marketing, law
No 5 6 7 8
Unable to
behave
education,
marketing
Unable to
behave
education,
marketing
Resistant to
behave
education,
marketing, law
Resistant to
behave
education,
marketing, law
Source: Rothschild, 1999, p. 31.
44  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
3. Ability is developed through education and can be reinforced with market-
ing. Legal approaches will frustrate people who do not have the abilities or
opportunities to conform to desired behaviors.
Rothschild (1999) also recognizes that other factors may influence which
strategic options to invoke—education, marketing, or law. One of the more
important of these factors is the perception of power. He states: “If managers
perceive that they have power, they will use either force of law or education. If
power is balanced between the society and the individual, or resides with the
individual, the manager will need to offer an exchange and will call on the use of
marketing” (p. 33, emphasis in the original). This position stands in marked
contrast to the criticism often leveled at social marketing of being “manipulative.”
What Rothschild makes clear here is that it is when people resort to persuasive
appeals and policy solutions that power dynamics are most in play. The mar-
keting exchange is, at its essence, one of equality.
The neat separation of education, marketing, and legal strategies is not so
apparent in real life; Rothschild (1999) is also clear that there are situations in
which all three approaches may be indicated. Another social marketer, Rob
Donovan (2011), holds a contrary point of view and states that the mythunder-
standing that law and education are distinct and separate from marketing does a
disservice to the marketing discipline. He points to practices in the commercial
sector, where marketers of a new product, for instance a new pharmaceutical, are
very interested in educating potential prescribers about the value of the new
medication (and I would add, equally concerned that regulators and payors
approve the use of the drug and will pay for it). In the earlier example of a poor,
urban, middle-aged woman who wants to become physically active—perhaps for
the first time in her life—most experts would argue that skills training—not
messages—is what is needed to help her learn appropriate ways to exercise. As
marketers, we should be keenly aware that instituting policies that allow her
access to school recreational facilities after classroom hours or to other safe and
convenient venues in which to exercise is going to be critical for her success. Then
we might be able to market physical activity to women like her. Are these distinct
approaches to behavior change, or should we develop a marketing approach that
is sensitive and responsive to the realities of her life that need to be addressed?
I agree with Donovan that a comprehensive marketing approach to the issue
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  45
could address all of these issues and perhaps others, such as incentives for setting
and meeting physical activity goals and for creating social support systems for
physical activity.
This point also goes to the individual change bias in Rothschild’s analysis—
his point of view is of a manager attempting to change people’s behavior to help
them fit into the world they live in. I would argue that many times it is the
environment that is to “blame”—not the person. And indeed, there are many
instances in which managers and policymakers need to attend to shaping and
influencing the marketplace or environment (that is, creating opportunities), a
process that is critical to tobacco control efforts, ensuring adequate supplies of
condoms and bed nets, preventing childhood obesity or drug and alcohol abuse,
and countering the sexualization of children.
Although education and law may be separate disciplines from marketing, this
should not naturally lead to their exclusion from a marketing strategy (we should
never say: “Oh, we can’t do that in our social marketing program; that’s an
environmental change [or a policy change]”). To maximize their potential
effectiveness, marketers should strive to have as large a toolbox as possible for
understanding and influencing the many determinants of human behavior—a
point I will return to in the next chapter.
People and Places Framework
Building on ecological models of health, in which interactions between the
attributes of people and the environments in which they live are critical deter-
minants of health and well-being, Maibach, Abroms, and Marosits (2007) pre-
sented a people and places framework for health communication and social
marketing in public health. This framework posits three levels of analysis for
people (individual, social network, and community or population) and two levels
(local and distal) for four types of places (see figure 2.1). At the individual level of
analysis, Maibach et al. highlight the importance of such attributes as self-efficacy
in outcome expectancies, affect, skills, motivation, intentions, biological predis-
positions (such as sensation seeking), and demographic variables. At the social
network level, the size and connectedness of a person’s social network, the
diversity of his or her ties in the network, the degree of social support and
positive modeling provided within the network, and the presence of positive
health opinion leaders are relevant factors. These authors note that community
46  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
factors are least understood by researchers, but culture, social norms, social
capital, social cohesion, collective efficacy, and social and economic disparities
are among the better documented determinants of a population’s health.
Maibach et al. (2007) incorporate four types of place-based influences on
behavior, originally proposed by Cohen, Scribner, and Farley (2000):
The availability of products and services that either enhance (primary care, oral
rehydration solution) or detract (liquor stores, high-calorie beverages)
from population health
The physical structures in the environment that can encourage healthier
behaviors (walking paths, parks), discourage unhealthy ones (automatic
car safety belts, prepackaged portion sizes), encourage unhealthy ones
(television, super-sized meals), and discourage healthy ones (food deserts,
no broadband Internet access)
FIGURE 2.1 The people and places framework
Health of the population
Health behaviors of the people in the population
Individuals Social
Networks
Population or
Community
Local-Level Distal-Level
Cognitions:
– knowledge
– beliefs
– self -efficacy
Affect
Skills
Motivation
Intentions
Biological
predispositions
Demographics
Smallest Largest
Level of Aggregation
Opinion leaders
Attributes of people The attributes of place
– mentors
– peers
– family
Social support
and modeling by:
Size and
connectedness
of personal
network
Social norms
(e.g., home, school,
neighborhood, local
stores, workplace, city)
(e.g., state,
region, nation, world)
Availability of
products & services
Availability of
products & services
Physical structures Physical structures
Social structures:
– laws and policies
– enforcement
Social structures:
– laws and policies
– enforcement
Cultural & media
messages
Cultural & media
messages
Social
cohesion
Culture
Collective
efficacy
Social
capital
Income
disparities
Racism
Smallest Largest
Level of Aggregation
Source: Maibach et al., 2007.
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  47
The laws and policies that either encourage or discourage healthier actions in the
community and the extent to which they are enforced (requirements for
infant car seats, taxes on certain products or services) or enable unhealthy
ones (permissive regulations on alcohol sales or tobacco advertising and
promotions)
The media and cultural messages in the environment that model and recom-
mend behaviors that promote or undermine the health of a community
(whether sex practices in television programs and movies are safe or not;
whether models used in fashion and entertainment media, especially when
the audience includes teenage girls, are of a healthy weight or not)
The local and distal levels of analysis come into play in identifying where and
how these influences originate: for example, analyzing whether restrictions on
alcohol sales are mandated at the national, state, or local level or whether violent
and misogynistic speech and behaviors are found in globally released music
CDs and videos or in performances by local bands.
The strategic implication of these five levels of analysis (individual, social
network, and community, and also local or distal) is that social marketers should
focus communication and marketing programs on creating change across as many
levels as possible in order to achieve the largest impact on behavior and health.
To help guide the selection of levels to focus on, Maibach et al. (2007) suggest
that managers assess
 The organization’s current and potential resources
 The relative importance of each field of influence in creating or sustaining the
problem being addressed
 The likely impact (and other potential benefits) associated with various pro-
gram options
 The organization’s capabilities to effectively implement programs aimed at
that level of influence
 The likely costs of implementing the various program options under
consideration
This framework has the strength of incorporating an interactional, or eco-
logical, perspective into social marketing strategy (cf. Green & Kreuter, 1999;
48  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
Sallis, Owen & Fisher, 2008). That it focuses not just on people but also on
places also helps to make it a framework for social change that positions the
context, not just the person, as a potential target for change. However, Maibach
et al. (2007) describe social marketing in very narrow terms and limit its use to
influencing people, not places. They call strategies to influence place attributes
organizational marketing (business-to-business marketing) and policy advocacy.
Following what Donovan (2011) and I have said earlier about the inclusiveness of
marketing practice, it is surprising that Maibach et al. (2007) do not include
organizational marketing as part of social marketing. This omission seems to
reflect the pervasiveness of the individual behavior change dogma in the social
marketing community and the limits that dogma places on people who should be
looking for more inspiration and ideas from marketing thought and practice—
not just from theory and research on individual behavior change. Thus, even
though organizational marketing can be extremely valuable for influencing
environments and creating place-based change, especially in the dissemination
and adoption of evidence-based prevention programs (see the discussion in
chapter 13), it is not what Maibach et al. term “traditional social marketing.”
However, to paraphrase Donovan (2011), social marketing is not something
we use to achieve individual behavior change; we use marketing to achieve
social goals, and these goals can include changes in organizational practices, social
norms, and physical environments. Perhaps the greatest barrier to the broader
acceptance and use of social marketing to improve people and conditions around
the world is the propensity of some of its advocates to squash it into such a small
box. The remainder of this chapter reveals how we can start to climb out of
that box.
An Integrative Model for Social Marketing
The desired outcomes of public health and social change programs are usually
ambitious and extend beyond individual behavior change; the people we focus on
extend beyond “consumers” or “at-risk” groups to policymakers, health care and
service providers, NGOs and nonprofit leaders, and even corporate marketers; the
products and services are often complicated to access and use; the behaviors that
we seek to alter are among the most personal; demand is diverse; the groups we
attempt to serve are often unaware of the risk in which their current behaviors
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  49
place them; we usually work with and through intermediary organizations;
political, cultural, and structural factors shape the ways problems are defined and
the types of solutions that are feasible to pursue; and competition for attention
and the choices people make is varied (Serrat, 2010; Manoff, 1985). Given the
many contours of the wicked problems we most often confront and the solutions
we need to design to address them, social marketing and social change require a
framework that considers the total context in which we do our work, not just
a psychological, sociological, or economic theory (chapter 3 addresses this issue in
greater detail). However, it is notable that most social marketing texts continue a
tradition of incorporating one or more theories of individual behavior change to
guide practitioners’ work (Andreasen, 1995; Donovan & Henley, 2003, 2010;
French, Blair-Stevens, McVey & Merritt, 2010; Hastings, 2007; Lee & Kotler,
2011; Lefebvre, 2001; Siegel & Lotenberg, 2007; Weinreich, 2011).
I suggest that a comprehensive framework for using marketing to address
social improvement goals—that is, an integrated social marketing approach—
will have two distinguishing elements: one that expresses the notion of a con-
sumer (person or citizen) orientation and a second that embodies the idea that
social marketing is designed for large-scale change efforts—not individual or
clinically focused education and behavior change activities (cf. Lefebvre, 2011a).
In such education and behavior change activities, intrapersonal and interper-
sonal factors, the amount of information to be conveyed, and the complexity of
the skills to be learned necessitate more individually tailored offerings than
social marketing programs are typically resourced for or capable of delivering
(though the emergence of new technologies is making these activities much
more efficient and likely in the future). However, this is not to suggest that such
individual behavior change activities cannot be integrated into a comprehensive
social marketing program as the needs of priority groups unfold and program
resources allow.
1. Social marketing is focused on people—their wants and needs, aspirations,
and lifestyles—and honors their freedom of choice. All marketing activities begin
with a focus on understanding people—their wants and needs, aspirations,
lifestyles, and choices. A focus on people is not the exclusive province of social
marketing, and may in fact provide common ground where social marketers can
share and adopt the ideas and approaches of other professionals who also start
from this premise that it’s the people first (design thinking is but one recent
50  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
addition to this tableau; Brown, 2008, 2009; Brown & Wyatt, 2010). Indeed
being people focused is becoming a defining and attractive feature for other
professionals. For example, Ling, Franklin, Lindsteadt, and Gearon (1992) noted
that conducting research that seeks to understand people on their terms, develops
insights into how social benefits and individual needs and realities can be mutually
accommodated, and fashions programs that blend an objective or social per-
spective with a consumer-centric approach resonates with public health philos-
ophies and approaches. These overlapping values and approaches are likely one
reason why social marketing has been so readily embraced by some of these
professionals. Social marketers also must recognize that people have freedom to
make choices and engage in behaviors; marketing is not a method for creating
conformity among unsuspecting or reluctant citizens (though there are no doubt
people who suspect—or wish—that it could).
2. Social marketing aims for aggregated behavior change—priority segments of
the population or markets, not individuals, are the focus of programs. Social mar-
keting is one of the few intervention strategies that explicitly reject the clinical
model, or education approach, for public health or population-level adoption of
new behaviors and ideas (Lefebvre & Flora, 1988; Lefebvre, Lurie, Saunders
Goodman, Weinberg & Loughrey, 1995; Walsh et al., 1993). As a population
or social change methodology, social marketing must be based on theoretical
models that guide the selection of the most relevant determinants, priority groups,
objectives, interventions, and evaluations for scalable behavior change, such as
theories of diffusion of innovations, social networks, community assets, political
economics, and social capital (Lefebvre, 2011b). Unfortunately, the vast majority
of programs continue to be developed from individual models of change that are
tested among small numbers of people in laboratory or controlled experimental
settings (Lefebvre, 2001). The question is whether such programs can be readily
transferred to real-world settings (or have ecological validity), or whether they are
so rigidly designed for testing hypotheses that they then constrain our ability to
take interventions to scale. For example, the Global HIV Prevention Working
Group (2007) report on the failure to scale proven HIV prevention interventions
notes that most people at risk for HIV infection have limited or no access to
prevention resources such as condoms, HIV testing, treatment of sexually trans-
mitted diseases, prevention of mother-to-child transmission, services for vulnerable
and marginalized populations, and safe blood supplies and injections in health
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  51
care settings. Aiming for aggregated change requires more than applying individual
theories of behavior change more broadly (for example, through mass media
campaigns), a point also made by Walls, Peeters, Proietto, and McNeil (2011) in
their critique of community-based and social marketing campaigns to prevent
obesity.
Designing Integrated Social Marketing Programs
Building on these two core concepts, an integrated social marketing approach has
four interrelated tasks that revolve around an identified benefit or value propo-
sition for a priority segment of the population. The first task is to clearly identify
and understand the priority group we desire to serve with our resources. The
second task, shown in the center of figure 2.2, is to identify the essence of what
people want, that benefit or value they can experience. We then turn to under-
standing the determinants, context, consequences, and relevance for the current
behaviors they engage in (or products or services they use), and more important,
how these can be altered to facilitate desired changes. And equipped with this
knowledge, we can then turn to the fourth task (the two outer rings of the figure) of
FIGURE 2.2 An integrative model of social marketing
The Social Marketing Idea
Target behavior
• Determinants
• Context
• Consequences
• Relevance
The marketing mix
The audience benefit
PSB
• design and features
Price
• incentives and costs
Place
• access and opportunities
Promotion
• communications and experiences
Products,
services
and behaviors
[PSB]
• Brand
• Personality
Source: Lefebvre, 2011a, p. 59.
52  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
tailoring a program offering to this specific group that is responsive to their unique
characteristics and offers alternative behaviors, products, or services that can be of
value or benefit to them.
The Priority Group
Unlike other social marketing authors and practitioners, I choose to talk about
priority groups or segments rather than target audiences, for two reasons. First, target
has military and power connotations that have no useful purpose in social
marketing and social change programs that avow a customer focus, respect and
honor people, and view the relationship between marketer and consumer as an
equitable one. One might choose to target behaviors for change, but targeting
people only reinforces a top-down, producer-oriented approach to social change
(that is, we are doing something to them). It is an anachronism that deserves to
disappear into the dustbin of history. Second, many people object to restricting
interventions to particular groups of people (or segments of the population).
Some of them would rather focus on everyone; others argue over the relative
merits of one target group over others. What I have found helpful in many of
these debates is to put the issue into efficiency and effectiveness terms. When we
are developing a program or campaign, we can agree that focusing resources on
priorities is important because resources are limited and we want to maximize our
impact. So just as we have priority issues to address, recognizing that we cannot
address all of them at one time, would not the same thinking apply for the people
we wish to serve? Ultimately we may want all to benefit—but given where we are
today, with the resources at hand, what should the priority groups be for now?
Who is in greatest need? Who might be leveraged into spreading more change
throughout their social networks or community? Who else might be critical to the
success of the program? Stating that these groups are priorities often reassures
people that their constituency is not being forgotten. It also motivates some
stakeholders to gather more evidence and make a better case in the future for how
and why their preferred priority group deserves resources allocated to its concerns
in the next funding or planning cycle.
The priority group becomes the center and touchstone of all social marketing
activities, both driving the questions we ask and validating the decisions that are
made. A priority group might be made up of any set of individuals who have a
role, a stake, or an interest in the problem at hand: the people whose lives are
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  53
immediately affected by the problem, the people who provide products and services
to them (or could), the people who control other resources or marketing functions
(media outlets, supply and distribution outlets), decision makers in various types of
organizations, or stakeholders and public policy shapers and makers, to name a few.
The process of determining the members of a priority group will reflect the
underlying philosophy people bring to the puzzle they are trying to solve (we will
return to this issue in chapter 3).
Carefully segmenting and selecting the groups to concentrate on establishes a
basis for all the other marketing activities, including how determinants and context
are analyzed, the brand and positioning strategies that are developed, and the
marketing mix that is deployed. A decision to designate a group as a priority is a
commitment to allocating resources and developing a unique marketing mix for
that group. Each priority group, by definition, requires a different marketing mix
(otherwise, if all the priority groups could be treated the same, we wouldn’t need to
distinguish between them). While this seems self-evident, many programs specify
two or more priority groups (or “target audiences”) and then go on to develop one
marketing mix that is applied to both of them. However, designing a tailored
marketing mix for each priority group requires crafting each mix around the
unique benefit or value of the program offering as it is perceived by each group
(whether that offering is a product, service, or behavior). Accurately identifying this
perceived benefit or value is the critical component of planning a social marketing
program.
The Value or Benefit
Sutton, Balch, and Lefebvre (1995) argued for the need to shift health com-
munication and social marketing programs from ones that stressed the scientific
evidence of benefits (reduce the risk of cancer, control hypertension, lose weight)
to ones that focused on the consumers’ realities and what consumers valued
(seeing children grow up, feeling more in control of their lives, having more
energy). Benefits should tap into and satisfy an underlying motivation of groups
of people, rather than reflecting the producers’ or sellers’ perspective, such as
health, a cleaner environment, better access to services, or even money. Although
change agents often talk about “motivating people,” this is an unfortunate
and misguided attempt at persuasion and influence. People have intrinsic and
sometimes extrinsic motivations for doing things; the discovery and insight
54  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
process (see chapters 4 and 5) is to find links between these existing motives and
the behaviors we wish to encourage or discourage. For even though external
appeals (fear, money) can lead to short-term behavior change, they rarely result in
the long-term changes we seek. Such attempts to “motivate” people may explain
why so many social change campaigns employ fear arousal; the motivational
effects are clearly seen and verbalized in the focus group room, even if the effects
on behavior change are questionable (Ruiter, Abraham & Kok, 2001).
One example of tapping into existing motives is the Climate and Energy
Project in Kansas. The project developers found that the idea of thrift, or saving
money, was one core benefit that residents found in energy conservation
(Kaufman, 2010). By talking with local ministers, project developers also dis-
covered the idea of creation care: the obligation of Christians to act as stewards of
their God-given world. These two benefits met both an external and immediate
motivation (saving more money) and an internal and aspirational one (living a
more Christian life). These benefits were used to design specific components of
a marketing program that could be then be positioned separately to each group
(a thrift motivated one and a spiritually motivated one), an example of seg-
menting people by the benefits or value they associate with the target behavior.
Indeed, some authors have suggested that segmentation of populations by the
benefits they perceive in using a product or service or engaging in a behavior may
be more useful in encouraging adoption than segmentation schemes based on
social-demographic characteristics (Haley, 1968; Harvey, 1990). I will return to
segmentation in more detail in chapter 6.
Rangan, Karin, and Sandberg (1996) found the lack of short-term, concrete
benefits for an individual to be a major barrier to the success of social marketing
efforts. They recommended that various types of benefits be considered in social
marketing programs, with the choice depending on how people in the priority
group perceive the costs for engaging in different behaviors and on whether the
expected benefits were directly to the group or for the larger social good. An
excellent example of this trade-off and its implications for programs and policy is
the analysis by Teklehaimanot, Sachs, and Curtis (2007) of how decisions for the
distribution of malaria nets can be influenced by the way benefits are allocated;
that is, are nets intended for the protection of individuals, who are then also seen
as responsible for the nets’ purchase and use, or is the broad use of nets intended
to convey a herd protection—social good—that argues for public sector financing
and distribution to all?
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  55
An additional level of interest for program designers who are considering
benefits and value is introduced by the service-dominant logic (S-D logic)
explored in chapter 1. People may be able to provide us with some understanding
of their perceived costs and benefits of engaging in new behaviors or using
products and services. However, this value-in-exchange, or weighing of the pros
and cons in making a decision to adopt new practices, is less important in the
long term than the value people experience when engaging in the behavior over
time (value-in-use). To return to the example of the Kansas Climate and Energy
Project, people may say in focus groups and interviews that thrift and creation care
are important benefits that encourage energy conservation behaviors. However,
if the program does not then enable them to experience these values or benefits
in actual use or practice, that jeopardizes not only the sustained success of the
program but also the trust they will have in the program sponsors in the future.
The Desired Behavior
The focus on behavior as a bottom line for many different types of programs has
had significant implications for public health and social change practice. For
example, many social marketing programs in developing countries have reported
unit sales (of bed nets, condoms, or ORS, for example) and clinic visits as out-
comes, and public health and social change programs have been content with
measuring changes in knowledge, attitudes, and intentions to act in certain ways.
However, squarely placing behavior change as the outcome of interest has shifted
many programs from strictly productivity, efficiency, and psychological metrics to
metrics based on observable outcomes, such as product and service use and
satisfaction.
As shown in figure 2.2, there are four sets of behavioral issues that program
designers must address: the determinants, the context, the consequences, and the
relevance of current and desired, or target, behaviors, from the point of view of
the priority group. When social marketers conceptualize and operationalize the
determinants and context, they must, as I and others argue (Blair-Stevens, Reynolds,
& Christopoulos, 2010; Donovan & Henley, 2010), go beyond individual variables
in order to consider social and community variables such as perceived social norms,
availability of social capital, poverty, housing conditions, the quality of built and
natural environments, working conditions, public policies, and community assets as
potential targets for change.
56  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
The consequences and relevance of current and alternative behaviors also
need to be assessed. What intrinsic and what social and other external rewards
and punishments support current behaviors? Which ones can be altered or what
new ones can be created to enable people to move to healthier and more pro-
ductive lives? Applied behavioral analysis, examining the ways in which the
application and removal of rewards and punishments can change behaviors, has
been viewed as an essential part of social marketing strategies to improve the
environment (Geller, 1989; Foxall, Oliveira-Castro, James, Yani-de-Soriano &
Sigurdsson, 2006). Economists point to monetary rewards and penalties as one of
the more important policy levers in influencing behavior change. Behavioral
economics—a blending of the behavior analysis, decision-making, and economic
perspectives on behavior change—has gained the attention of policymakers and
the public (Kagel & Winkler, 1972; Kahneman, 2011; Levitt & Dubner, 2005;
Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). Insights into how current behaviors are maintained
and how we might shape and design healthier or more socially beneficial ones
need to reflect our understanding of their relevance in people’s everyday lives and
be explicitly incorporated into social marketing programs.
The Marketing Mix Applied to Behaviors, Products, and Services
An integrative approach to social marketing acknowledges that programs occur
in a larger market context. As I noted in the first chapter, social marketing in
developing countries evolved to meet the pressing need to provide life-saving and
socially necessary products and services to reduce family size, improve maternal
and child survival, and prevent and treat infectious diseases. In developed
countries, where markets already provided many of these essential products and
services and where noncommunicable diseases have been the primary causes of
morbidity and mortality, social marketing programs have been much more intent
on changing risk behaviors for disease. In developing countries it has become
clear that products and services (such as condoms for HIV prevention and bed
nets for malaria control) can be necessary yet not sufficient conditions to improve
health. What is crucial is that people have access to and use these products and
services (family planning, HIV testing and counseling centers, prenatal clinics,
and so forth) in ways that change behaviors and affect morbidity and mortality.
In contrast, developed countries have more developed private sectors to sense
and respond to people’s needs, their governments support more health care and
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  57
essential services, and more people can afford to purchase products and services as
they need them. As a consequence, social marketers in these countries have paid
little attention to how products and services might augment their behavior change
programs (Community Preventive Services Task Force, 2010). However, in all
settings, the program design tasks for social marketers are to identify the gaps in
the marketplace and to craft new offerings shaped around the 4Ps that can
improve health, well-being, and the environment.
Chapter 1 introduced the idea of the marketing mix, or the 4Ps: product, price,
place, and promotion. The following sections discuss how social marketers can
apply each of these elements as they define the behaviors, products, and services
their programs will offer.
Product When we think about a product in terms of the marketing mix, we
should be considering behaviors, products, and services as offerings that are
selected and tailored to best serve people in our priority groups. For example,
social marketing programs for smoking cessation might include mass media
campaigns focusing on persuasive appeals to change behavior, smoking cessation
hotlines and classes (services), and nicotine replacement patches and gums
(products). Researchers may be interested in which of these offerings is more
effective than the others; social marketers are concerned with what mix of behaviors
(making trial quitting attempts through community quit-smoking contests, going
cold turkey, or trying a gradual cessation plan, for example), products, and services
will meet the needs of each priority group and increase group members’ aggregated
quit rate.
Whether the offering is a behavior one engages in or adopts or a product or
service that supports or enables behavior change, the ideas of branding, relevance,
and positioning come into play (Evans & Hastings, 2008b). Explicit here is the
need to understand the competition, whether it takes the form of other organi-
zations, interests, and programs or competing behaviors (a choice of doing one
thing or another). Branding is not the logo, theme song, and tagline of an orga-
nization or agency, a campaign, or a program; it is what the behavior, program,
and sponsor mean to the priority group of people. An exemplar is Rare, an
international NGO with species conservation programs that uses a local threat-
ened species for image and communication purposes in order to tap into national
pride that supports behavior and conservation objectives (Boss, 2008). Branding
and positioning will be covered in more detail in chapter 7.
58  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
For the reasons described at the beginning of this marketing mix discussion,
too many social marketers in developed countries limit their thinking and actions
to behavior change as their only product offering. All social marketers need to
embrace, as part of their core competencies, the development and marketing of
products and services that lead to or support behavior change. These products
and services might not be developed by the usual social marketing organizations
but instead by social entrepreneurs (cf. Pilloton, 2009) and by private companies,
public agencies, or NGOs. The application of marketing principles can position
and market the personal value and social benefits of these products and services to
priority groups, integrate them into programs that reinforce healthier choices and
environments, and develop strategies to facilitate equal access and opportunities
to use them.
Price Social marketing has taken the idea of price beyond money to include
psychological, social, geographical, and other rewards and punishments for
everyday behaviors (Lefebvre & Flora, 1988). Economists and marketers view
price not just as costs but as incentive opportunities as well (Fiszbein & Schady,
2009; Haveman, 2010). Here’s a simple example: a woman in a rural village is
not likely to take her sick child to a health clinic, even if the cost for services
is nominal, if it takes her five hours to walk there and five more hours to return
home (physical and time costs), robs her of ten or more hours she could otherwise
spend working and earning a wage (opportunity cost), and risks the social
alienation that may follow if her child is discovered to be HIV positive (social
cost). An exclusive focus on just monetary cost limits program development as
much as would a focus on only psychological, social, or physical barriers.
An inclusive view of the costs encountered by people provides insights for
realigning incentives and costs for products, services, and behaviors in ways that
will resonate with people and lead to better outcomes. This realignment means
more than persuading people to use a new set of variables and weights in their
personal calculation of the risks and benefits of acting in certain ways. Realignment
also means adjusting the environment, policies, and marketplace whenever pos-
sible to shift power to the individual, giving each person the freedom to choose and
to exercise basic human rights. We need to start asking ourselves questions such as
these: Where do inequities in health status stem from? Is income generation a
prerequisite for health improvement in impoverished communities? How do we
facilitate making markets work for the poor and vulnerable? The evolution of
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  59
marketing for social change will have to expand beyond individual choices to
markets and societies and how they shape the prices people confront and the
choices that are available to various groups of people.
Place Lack of access to health-promoting products and services can create a large
gap between wanting to engage in a healthier lifestyle and being able to do it (how
do we place healthy behaviors within arm’s reach of desire?). Locating condom-
vending machines in bars and nightclubs; creating mobile, voluntary HIV
counseling and testing services; providing one-stop locations to apply for various
public welfare benefits; and limiting the sale of tobacco and alcohol products to
certain types of stores or reducing the density of these outlets in particular
neighborhoods are examples of place variables that social marketing programs
may include in their mix. Equally important is creating access and opportunities
to perform healthier behavioral alternatives—or to not perform the unhealthier
behaviors. Clean indoor air laws clearly address having access to air that is not
imbued with environmental tobacco smoke. Increasing the availability of fresh
fruits and vegetables, providing more safe places to be physically active, and
offering healthier options in restaurants and fast-food establishments are other
examples of improving access and opportunities to engage in healthy behaviors.
What should also become clear in these examples is that place, like the other
elements of the marketing mix, does not act independently of those others. As the
previous examples illustrate, the nature of the product or service can affect place
(whether there will be one or multiple locations for services, for example), and
place will also affect price (the effort expended to visit a one-stop application
office versus visiting several offices). We can also increase the price for using
tobacco and alcohol products by restricting their distribution to certain times and
locations. That is why this approach is called the marketing mix; putting each
piece together changes other pieces as well.
Although it is rarely viewed as a social marketing issue, the role of place, or
distribution, lies at the heart of concerns over inequities in health status and social
justice. While access to health care services and healthy foods and products comes
immediately to mind when we think about distribution inequalities, Viswanath
and Kreuter (2007) argue that communication inequalities (access to health
information, for example) among social groups may be an underlying determinant
of many social and health problems. They note that communication inequalities
act as significant deterrents to obtaining and processing information; to using
60  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
information to make prevention-, treatment-, and survivorship-related decisions;
and to establishing relationships with providers—all of which affect prevention
and treatment outcomes. The implication of this work in communication
inequalities is that change agents should be especially attentive to place when they
consider the promotion element of the marketing mix. Communication messages
and tactics might increase existing gaps in knowledge, health, and well-being
among population groups rather than reduce them if careful consideration is not
given to communicating in ways that priority groups can access, understand, and
act on.
Promotion Many programs have been characterized in the literature and elsewhere
as social marketing because they are mass communication (or 1P) programs. This
seems to reflect the mindset presented in the Coca-Cola marketing example in
chapter 1. Most people associate advertising campaigns with marketing, and there
is also an ongoing confusion between marketing and “selling” something or
“persuading” people to act in certain ways or use certain products. Effective
marketing is in fact achieved through the mutual creation of value (a win-win
situation) or an exchange of some kind. In contrast to numerous 1P campaigns for
behavior change (which I will delve into further in chapter 10), promotion in the
marketing mix needs to concentrate on how to communicate the value proposition
of the program offering, its price, and its accessibility (place) to the priority
audience in ways that attract their attention, inspire them to act, and facilitate their
trying the product, service, and behavior we are offering.
Communicating behaviors, products, and services; incentives; and opportu-
nities to priority groups has become more complicated with the current cultural
and technological revolutions in communication, including the increasing use of
social and mobile media and interactive websites. These changes, and their
consequences for consumer behavior, have led to the realization that modern
communication models that include the use of social networks and dynamic,
reciprocal communication patterns need to frame our thinking and activities
(Lefebvre, 2007). This new recognition also forces us to think about ways to
surround people with our programs and messages and provide them with mul-
tiple opportunities to be exposed to behaviors, products, services, and commu-
nications that may lead to behavior change (Lefebvre, Olander & Levine, 1999;
Resnicow & Page, 2008). We will dive more deeply into these social technologies
and their role in social marketing programs in chapter 12.
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  61
Communication is also important to any organization involved in social
change for developing and marshaling support for public policy initiatives among
policymakers, the media, opinion leaders, and the general public. These public
policy initiatives can set the agenda for offering new or expanded products and
services or can change the ways in which unhealthy behaviors have been sup-
ported and healthy behaviors made difficult to practice. Media advocacy and
social marketing both focus on broad population change objectives that alter
the social context, environment, or marketplace in which behavior occurs—
objectives such as changing attitudes toward people with mental illness, initiating
community recycling programs, or enacting consumer financial protection reg-
ulations. Promotion in social marketing is more than public relations, advertising,
and persuasive communication; it can also be used to set public and policy
agendas in communities or across a country to build support for systemic change.
Markets and Social Marketing
Most social marketing programs occur within a micromarketing environment.
That is, most, if not all, attention is given to understanding and influencing
people through the actions of producers—the organizations that fund, create, and
implement social change programs. The micromarketing approach uncovers needs
or wants that consumers may or may not be aware of, problems we and they have
identified that require solutions, and aspirations they have for both themselves and
others. Producers have the responsibility of sensing these needs or demands,
identifying unmet needs or unresolved problems, and using the marketing mix to
develop offerings that provide personal, organizational, and social benefits. The
dynamic interplay between the needs, wants, problems, and aspirations voiced by
consumers and the ways producers sense and respond to them is the transactional
or co-creation process. Some key aspects of the transactional process to consider
are the push-pull dynamics (are marketers pushing behaviors, products, and ser-
vices onto people, or are consumers pulling, or demanding, behaviors, products,
and services from organizations and producers?), the value creation opportunities
for both parties, and the mediators of this transaction, whether they be other
people, organizations, or digital media.
It is this focus on the exchange or co-creation process between consumers and
producers that also distinguishes social marketing from approaches to social change
that are solely sales oriented (that is, persuasive) or top-down (that is, coercive)
62  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
(Donovan, 2011; Donovan & Henley, 2010; French & Blair-Stevens, 2010;
Lefebvre & Flora, 1988). As Hastings (2007) has added, these transactions should
not be perceived as zero-sum games, in which one party wins to another’s loss and
the winner is presumed to be the more skillful or manipulative marketer or pro-
ducer. Lefebvre (1992) suggested that social marketing is a process of seeking a
win-win for both organizations and the people they serve. We can expand that to a
triple-win outcome scenario in which society is also a beneficiary through the
externalities (or positive spin-offs) of the transaction.
The idea of externalities is critical for understanding the importance of
markets in society and social marketing. It is the negative externalities that may
accrue to society when commercial entities market products to consumers that
precipitate greater scrutiny of these entities’ practices. For example alcohol pro-
ducers did not have plans to increase liver diseases and traffic fatalities, energy
producers did not intend to turn the air into a risk factor for developing asthma,
tobacco companies were not created to kill people, and certain segments of the
food and beverage industry do not exist to create obese people and increase rates
of diabetes. Yet few people doubt that these consequences, or externalities, need
to be put under control if not eliminated entirely. As discussed in chapter 1, these
social consequences of commercial marketing have been a longtime interest of
some marketing scholars.
Echoing Hastings (2007) and Lefebvre (1992), Donovan and Henley (2010)
note that positive gains and received value are essential for both parties in a
successful transaction. At issue is whether the perceived benefits outweigh the
costs for each party. Some social marketers have taken this last point to position
exchange as a theory for change in social marketing programs (Andreasen, 1995;
Hastings, 2007; Kotler & Lee, 2008; Siegel & Lotenberg, 2007). These authors
suggest that individual change is determined by an internal exchange in which
benefits and costs are weighed prior to taking action. This position reflects a
rational person point of view about voluntary behaviors that was long held by
economists and some psychologists but that is now rapidly being supplanted
by data and models that take into account unconscious or automatic, emotional,
and other “irrational” influences on behavioral choices.
This book takes the view that exchanges are not internal, rational decision-
making processes. Rather, the classical notion of exchange involves a transaction
between two parties who each have something of value to the other and where
each party is free to accept or reject the offer and each party believes it is
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  63
appropriate or desirable to deal with the other (cf. Kotler, 1988). While there are
concerns that using the concept of an exchange may be a form of “intellectual
contortion” (Elliott, 1991), I see the emergence of S-D logic, and its idea that mutual
exchanges of knowledge and resources create value for both parties (a win-win), as
supporting the centrality of exchange in marketing. Facilitating exchanges among
actors in a marketplace is the core of marketing, whether we think of such exchanges
as involving tangible goods, knowledge and resources, or ideas and behaviors. Yet a
reliance on exchange theory as a theory for all human behavior ignores the extensive
literature suggesting that there are many theories of human behavior as it relates to
health and social conditions (more of that discussion in the next chapter). The
example of the health information marketplace that follows this section will further
clarify this point.
In contrast to the micro, or individual, view of social marketing, the macro-
marketing view provides a substantive base for moving social marketing to a new
level of relevance for social change. Macromarketing is concerned with marketing
systems and the effects of markets and marketing systems on society, rather than on
organizations or individual customers (Mittelstaedt, Kilbourne & Mittelstaedt,
2006). Layton (2011) defines a marketing system as
 A network of individuals, groups and/or entities;
 embedded in a social matrix;
 linked directly or indirectly through sequential or shared participation
in economic exchange;
 which jointly and/or collectively create value with and for customers,
through the use of;
 assortments of products, services, experiences and ideas; and
 that emerge in response to or anticipation of customer demand [p. 259].
There is a lot of depth in those few phrases. The idea can be restated this way:
people who share a social network and who receive value from each other through
meeting or anticipating each other’s needs through the exchange of products,
services, experiences, and ideas are a marketing system. Layton (2011) notes that
marketing systems can be found in primitive tribal societies as well as advanced
Western economies. These systems may take the form of single acts of exchange
64  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
between a seller and buyer or complex interactions that involve multiple produ-
cers, many consumers, and a wide range of objects, services, and actions.
Exchanges within systems might be simple planned or unplanned choices, as occur
for example in a supermarket, or might involve complex, multiparty negotiations,
as occur in developing partnerships and coalitions. Thus these marketing systems
might be called tribes, villages, neighborhoods, or communities, or they might take
the form of entire sectors of an economy, such as energy or health care.
Among social marketers in the developing world, the analysis of markets is a
core competency, especially the structure and dynamics of the distribution system
for products and services. Hanson, Kumaranayake, and Thomas (2001), for
example, highlight the need to assess and harness local markets in order to expand
and sustain access to contraceptive products in developing countries. This mar-
ket-based approach has both supporters and critics (Curtis et al., 2003; Easterly,
2006). In developed countries, social marketers have shown little explicit interest
in marketing systems. It is time for us to evolve our understanding of social
marketing systems, a step that is consistent with the movement toward network
and systems level thinking in many other disciplines and enterprises (cf. Diez
Roux, 2007; Oltvai & Barabasi, 2002; Sallis et al., 2006; Watts, 2004). Mittelstaedt
et al. (2006) conclude that when we can examine a transaction, including ante-
cedents and consequences, in the context of the entire system of the marketplace,
we greatly improve our ability to understand the role of markets in society.
I suggest that adopting a macromarketing perspective will enhance the strategies
and tools that social marketers can apply to social change.
Example of the Health Information Marketplace
This example uses the puzzle of determining how new developments in health
information technology might affect consumers to explore a macromarketing
perspective in social marketing. I propose that potential challenges can be
identified by looking at the dynamics of the health information marketplace as
expressed through its three types of actors: producers of health information,
mediators of that information, and consumers of that information. For purposes
of discussion, this example considers three types of producers: producers of facts,
such as science- and evidence-based organizations; producers of folklore, the
commonsense and intuitive understandings of health and disease that are trans-
mitted by various means including, for example, culture; and producers of
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  65
fallacies, those who traffic in unreliable or unsubstantiated information. The
mediators of this produced information are the individuals and organizations that
take facts, folklore, or fallacies and create various products and services around
them. These mediators often use elements of the marketing mix to create
incentives, minimize costs, increase accessibility and convenience, and commu-
nicate the information in persuasive ways to push it toward consumers or respond
to consumer demand (for example, quick and easy solutions for weight loss).
In response to these marketing efforts, consumers take a variety of actions, such as
picking up brochures, paying for special diets or exotic treatment regimens, or
donating to an organization to support its research and education outreach
efforts. These consumers then experience certain benefits and consequences, or
value-in-use, as a result.
This two-step process of moving from producers to mediators and then on to
consumers has characterized the dynamics of the traditional health information
marketplace. However, the development of new forms of media, their pervasive
adoption by large segments of the population, and the ability they give consumers
to directly interact with both producers and mediators has led to a new dynamic
in this marketplace. Now producers and mediators must be concerned with
engaging consumers at a much deeper level, responding to feedback from
consumers—especially as it occurs in social media channels—and being held more
accountable for the outcomes of their actions, products, and services. When social
marketers are called on to help organizations respond to this new environment,
the default decision is typically to focus on the information needs and channels
of consumer groups (micromarketing). I believe that there is a role for social
marketers to play in considering the strategic challenges and responses these new
technologies present to the larger (macro) health information marketing system.
Thinking about health information in the marketplace also allows us to
consider how various market failures can be anticipated and addressed by both
public policy and program interventions (see figure 2.3). Market failures can
be thought of as instances in which the pursuit of self-interest—whether by
producers, mediators, or consumers—leads to outcomes that are less effective,
efficient, equitable, or desirable from a social point of view (recall the earlier
discussion of communication inequalities). Five such market failures are depicted
in the figure; some of them may be recognizable to you in your own work.
Imperfect competition exists when only a few actors are producing information
or acting as the mediators of it or when one actor dominates the market in
66  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
producing or disseminating information. Imagine for a moment that only the
federal government or only one business or NGO funded and produced all the
research about a certain disease and its treatment. Would you trust this informa-
tion? Believe that it evenhandedly considered all the alternative approaches? Think
it was satisfactory for all information about the disease to come from only that
one source? Imperfect competition is also seen when certain bits of folklore or
fallacies come to dominate the way consumers think about and act on such issues
as childhood immunizations or the prevention and treatment of HIV. One
concern many public health agencies now have is that new communication
technologies can facilitate the production and availability of inaccurate health
information in the marketplace; at the same time it is also true that these new
technologies provide innovative tools for detecting and addressing misinformation
(Eysenbach, 2002).
Information asymmetry occurs when one party has more or better information
than another in the market system. Such asymmetries are most apparent in pro-
fessional-client relationships, such as the ones between health care professionals
FIGURE 2.3 Areas for market failures in the health information marketplace
Information
asymmetry
Opportunity
costs
Producers Consumers
Producers/
mediators
Value
evaluation
• Facts
• Folklore
• Fallacies
• Products
• Services
• Incentives
• Costs
• Convenience
• Communication
• Response
• Feedback
• Engagement
• Outcomes
• Actions
• Benefits
• Consequences
Mediators
Needs of
different
groups
Imperfect
competition
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  67
and their patients, where the professional is acknowledged and sought out for an
expertise the patient does not possess. The advent of the World Wide Web,
however, has made health and medical information more easily accessible
to patients. As a consequence, many health care professionals have faced the
challenge of having better-informed patients who were not only bringing
information from health websites to their appointments but offering their own
self-diagnoses and prescriptions for treatment (Murray et al., 2003). It is not
surprising that many health care professionals express deep skepticism and
concern over the proliferation of health and medical websites; these sites disrupt
the status quo by reducing the information asymmetry in the relationship.
Information asymmetries can be fostered when producers and mediators
selectively incorporate (or curate) facts along with folklore and fallacies into their
products and services to sell “folk remedies” or counterfeit drugs to treat malaria
or tuberculosis. Other types of asymmetry occur when mediators make decisions
about how to package and present the features of products and services (“new,”
“improved,” “certified”) or make other decisions that lead to information that is
not conveyed in a culturally or linguistically relevant fashion.
The opportunity costs shown in figure 2.3 are the value of the alternatives that
are not chosen by consumers based on the health information they have received.
These opportunity costs might include financial costs of not seeking treatment
when it would otherwise have been indicated, of time spent trying to decipher
and understand complex medical or insurance documents, of not knowing the
food they are eating or the air they are breathing is harmful to their health, or of
undergoing extensive treatments for conditions when there were simpler and just
as effective approaches available. In these examples, the role of information
asymmetry in decision making is apparent. What opportunity costs focus on are
the actions, benefits, and consequences as the consumer experiences them in
the marketplace. Indeed, one definition of an at-risk population is a group of
people with a personal or situational disadvantage in the marketplace that might
create negative outcomes for them or society, or for both (Pechmann et al., 2011).
In keeping with this definition of an at-risk population, what social marketers
focus on at the macromarketing level is whether the health information mar-
ketplace is meeting the needs of different groups or whether it is putting some
subgroups at a disadvantage through one or more market failures. For example,
concerns can be raised as to whether the specific needs of people with low health
literacy are being met; whether appropriate resources are being directed toward
68  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
meeting the needs of the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender community; and
whether information is being made accessible to people with various forms of
physical and cognitive handicaps. The macromarketing perspective asks whether
these needs are being met by the system of health information production and
distribution (mediation), and if not, how the system could be developed or
altered through public policy, incentives, and marketing strategies to better
address these needs. In any discussion of health disparities, ideas for changing
the health information marketing system to address such disparities need to be
as large a concern for policymakers as funding and developing more tailored
programs to address them at the local level.
The final asymmetry addressed in this analysis concerns value expectation; that
is, how does the consumer expect to benefit from health information and how is
that satisfaction or dissatisfaction related to producer and mediator engagement,
response, feedback, and outcomes? Clearly, one source of market failure can be
that different consumers have different expectations for the benefits they will
receive from certain types of health information, ranging from consumers who are
totally disinterested to those who immerse themselves in gathering the latest
information to achieve better health or longevity. For example, different types of
consumers have been found to have very different preferences and motivations for
having nutrition information on food packages (Grunert & Wills, 2007). And we
could anticipate that these different value expectations will color their response to
health information as well as the level of feedback and engagement they have with
the information source. Especially in an era of social media, producers and dis-
tributors of information of all kinds are finding that the level of consumer
response and feedback, as well as the facility with which a company or agency
responds to this feedback, can have significant consequences for their enterprise
(Li & Bernoff, 2008).
This discussion of macromarketing and the illustrative case of the health
information marketplace is intended to provoke discussion and research among
social marketers. Macromarketing, or systems thinking, can be applied to many
social puzzles where marketing principles, techniques, and innovation are at issue.
Learning to think out of the individual box and in terms of networks and systems
is going to be a challenge for some marketers. Some will say that they do not have
control over these powerful and ubiquitous marketing systems, but this is a
hollow argument. Yes, one group in a community may not be able to change
the marketing practices of a global giant, but instances of local ordinances that
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  69
restrict the marketing practices of tobacco companies, or eliminate corporate
sponsorships of sporting events, or create programs for nutrition information in
local restaurants are examples of the opposite truth. Local marketplaces can be
changed, and these changes can in turn spur broader changes in national and
regional markets. Some people will argue that these are examples of media
advocacy, not marketing (cf. Wallack, Dorfman, Jernigan & Themba, 1993).
What these same people do not recognize is that many media advocacy projects
are explicitly designed to influence marketing practices and systems (to restrict
advertising, to increase prices through tax policies, or to limit product distribution
outlets, for example). Too many of us have been so caught up in individual
behavior change that we have been blind to the larger marketing context in which
we all live and where solutions to our puzzles may lie. I hope that these initial
chapters have begun a process of change with you.
ETHICS FOR SOCIAL MARKETING
The scope of the concepts covered in this chapter may leave readers breathless—
and concerned. Such a sweeping view of social marketing—changing people’s
behaviors, community and social norms, public policies and markets—rightly
raises the question of what guide rails exist to keep social marketers and social
change agents from straying into dangerous terrain or areas where they do not
belong or creating intentional or unintentional harm or injury to people, com-
munities, or society.
It is a question that many social marketers and others have grappled with over
the years. Ethics are interwoven into virtually every decision a social marketer or
any other social change agent makes, from determining whether there is a problem
(as perceived by whom?) to answering questions like these: Who determines what
the social good is? What group or organization is our impetus and principal sup-
porter (financial or otherwise)? Why are we using certain theories of change rather
than others (are we, for example, starting from a micromarketing premise of
“blaming the victim”)? What behaviors should be changed or offered as alter-
natives? Should we directly take on competitors (such as groups with a religious
opposition to certain practices or groups that oppose fluoridation or childhood
vaccinations)? Should we focus on priority groups and, if so, which ones (and
could we stigmatize or disempower groups in the process)? How should our
70  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
offerings be positioned (and are the value propositions or benefits truthful)? What
design should we have for the marketing mix and tactics (should we, for example,
focus on a communication campaign knowing that adequate access to the pro-
moted products or services is not available to certain groups of people)? How
should we conduct our research and evaluation activities (is privacy protected, for
example)? Are we contributing to increases in inequalities (for example, in access to
products and services, information, risk behaviors, or disease or death from certain
causes)? Which organizations should we collaborate or partner with (will we avoid
alcohol, big oil, firearms, and tobacco companies for starters)? Might our program
infringe on the rights or undermine the credibility of stakeholders? Are we being
trustworthy stewards of public goodwill (and in many cases public monies)? Have
we given careful thought to preventing or mitigating foreseeable negative or
unintentional consequences of our program? Are we respecting people’s rights,
dignity, and capacity for self-determination by ensuring that we are not projecting
a “moral imperialism,” imposing the tyranny of the majority or the biases and
prejudices of particular elected or unelected groups, leveraging power differences,
or resorting to outright propaganda or manipulation? (See Andreasen, 1995;
Brenkert, 2002; Donovan & Henley, 2010; Hastings, 2007; Kotler & Roberto,
1989; Lee & Kotler, 2011; O’Shaughnessy, 1996; Siegel and Lotenberg, 2007;
Truss & White, 2010.)
Few of the authors just cited, or I, can offer you absolute answers on what is
ethical or not in all times and places. However, some general suggestions for guide
rails follow:
 Do no harm to others (physically, psychologically, or socially).
 Treat everyone fairly and equally.
 Be truthful and transparent.
 Protect people’s privacy.
 Avoid stereotyping and scapegoating.
 Respect people’s dignity and free choice.
 Use research-based evidence to make decisions whenever possible.
 Seek consensus on program goals, objectives, and strategies from involved
parties and stakeholders.
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  71
 Be inclusive during the program design phase.
 Conduct an ethical review of the program before launch, preferably with
external representatives from the community or peer groups.
Yes, there are many ethical questions to consider; though I also think they are
not unique to social marketing programs. However, it is important to reflect
upon these questions whenever we step out of the clinical encounter into the real
world. Social change always involves or affects people who often do not agree
among themselves and who have different life circumstances and perspectives.
Each of these people is involved in a political process (and I do not necessarily
break this down by political party affiliation) in which on the one hand each
person is striving to pursue his or her own self-interest and welfare and on the
other hand is trying to be involved with other people in achieving things as a
community. The debate that social marketers and change agents will always get
caught up in is who gets what, and when and how? Often social marketers find
themselves at an intersection, or collision zone, where individual rights and social
good are framed, debated, and passionately fought over as decisions are made
about how to pursue collective action for the collective good and how to answer
the what, when, and how questions (cf. Stone, 1997). We need to be on guard
that these political decisions do not overwhelm the ethical ones.
SUMMARY
Despite the popular perception, social marketing is more than the development of
messages aimed at target audiences to persuade or cajole them into acting dif-
ferently. At its essence, social marketing is using marketing to improve social
conditions. Social conditions change when behaviors, environments, and policies
change. Social marketing is an evolving set of strategies and tools that demands of
its practitioners an unrelenting focus on people and their perceptions and realities
as the basis of program design and implementation. In a “power” vernacular, some
people might call it a bottom-up versus a top-down approach, but marketers view
the approach as one of equality, where an exchange or co-creation of value is the
primary relationship to be established with people formerly known as the audience.
72  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
This chapter has looked at three strategic models managers can use when
initially considering what their social marketing activities might aspire to achieve
and how to implement this achievement. While some try to demarcate various
approaches to social change (using education, psychology, the law, advocacy, or
entertainment), other social marketers embrace the interdisciplinary nature of the
tools that are available for social change efforts. At the end of the day it is whether
these tools are applied deliberately and effectively, with the consumers’ point
of view informing and guiding the process, that draws a critical distinction
between marketing approaches and other approaches that do not have this people
orientation infused into the process. I used the health information marketplace
to illustrate how social marketing can apply a macromarketing perspective to
understanding systems in order to identify market failures and address these
failures through programs and policies that reduce inequalities among at-risk
populations. And the last section noted many of the ethical questions that can
rightfully be raised throughout the process of designing, implementing, and
evaluating a social marketing program. The point I do not want you to lose sight
of is that in the world of social change, the dynamics of the political process are
always present.
KEY TERMS
benefits
ecological models
ecological validity
externalities
imperfect competition
information asymmetry
integrative model
market failure
marketing mix
marketing systems
MOA model
operational social marketing
opportunity costs
people and places framework,
priority group
push-pull dynamics
strategic social marketing
target behavior
value expectation
C H A P T E R 2 : P R I N C I P L E S O F S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G  73
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What does social marketing gain or lose when it is focused only on individual
behavior change? Can education, economic, technological, and legal approaches
to behavior change fit with a marketing approach to social change? Create an
example where all five of these factors might be applied to a social issue.
2. How do the Rothschild model and the people and places framework com-
plement each other, and how are they different from each other? Think about
applying first one and then the other to the same social puzzle. How would
the approaches differ from each other?
3. What are the differences between and implications of doing social marketing
and doing marketing for social good ? Should marketing be the core discipline
of social marketing, or are there alternatives?
4. Review the two main tenets of the integrated approach to social marketing.
How would you describe these tenets to the members of an organization
that was considering a marketing approach, and how would you express that
approach to them? Suggestion: role-play a presentation that helps people
understand why they should go with marketing.
74  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E

