Social Marketing: An Approach to Planned Social Change
Dr. Naganandini S.1, Dr. Sanjeev K.2, Dr. Shilpashree K.B3
INTRODUCTION
Marketingis the business function that
identifies customer needs and wants, determines
which target markets the organization can serve
best and designs appropriate products, services,
and programs to serve these markets. It guides the
entire organization. (1)
Social Marketingis the systematic application
of marketing, along with other concepts and
techniques, to achieve specific behavioral goals for
a social good. Social marketing can be applied to
promote merit goods, or to make a society avoid
demerit goods and thus to promote society’s
wellbeing as a whole. (2)
Social marketing was “born” as a discipline in
the 1970s, when Philip Kotler and Gerald Zaltman
realized that the same marketing principles that
were being used to sell products to consumers
could be used to “sell” ideas, attitudes and
behaviors.(3) Social marketing began as a formal
discipline in 1971, with the publication of “Social
Marketing: An approach to Planned Social
Change” in the Journal of Marketing by marketing
experts Philip Kotler and Gerald Zaltman .(4)
Craig Lefebvre and June Flora introduced
social marketing to public health community in
1988 where it has been most widely used and
explored. They noted that there was a need for
‘large scale, broad based, behavior change focused
programs’ to improve public health (the
community wide prevention of cardiovascular
diseases in their respective projects), and outlined
seven essential components of social marketing
that still hold today.The essential components of
social marketing are:
1. A consumer orientation to realize
organizational (social) goals.
2. An emphasis on the voluntary exchanges of
goal and services between providers and
consumers.
3. Research in audience analysis and
segmentation strategies.
4. The use of formative research in product and
message design and the pretesting of these
materials.
5. An analysis of distribution (or communication)
channels.
6. Use of the marketing mix-utilization and
blending product, price, place and promotion
characteristics in intervention planning and
implementation.
7. A process tracking system with both
integrative and control functions.
DEFINITION
In 1971 Kotler and Gerald Zaltman defined
social marketing as the “design, implementation,
and control of programs calculated to influence the
acceptability of social ideas, and involving
considerations of product, planning, pricing,
communication, distribution and marketing
research.”(3)
The National Social Marketing Centre defines
Social Marketing as:
‘The systematic application of marketing,
alongside other concepts and techniques to achieve
specific behavioural goals, to improve health and
reduce inequalities’. (5)
Health-Related Social Marketing is: “The
systematic application of marketing, alongside
other concepts and techniques, to achieve specific
behavioural goals, to improve health and reduce
inequalities”.
Marketing involves discovering the wants of a
target audience and then creating the goods and
services to satisfy them.
This distinction highlights the fundamental
ethos of social marketing:
• To start with the target audience
• Understand their beliefs, motivations and
behaviors
• Understand their environment
• Build a solution that responds to their real-life
wants and needs
1Professor and Head, 2P.G. Student, 3Senior Lecturer, Dept. of Public Health Dentistry, The Oxford Dental College,
Bengaluru
JOURNAL OF THE INDIAN ASSOCIATION OF
PUBLIC HEALTH DENTISTRY Vol:2011 ISSUE:18 SUPPL. II
815
[Downloaded free from http://www.jiaphd.org on Friday, March 2, 2018, IP: 117.239.56.101]
Early health applications of social marketing
emerged as part of the international development
effort (under the banner of “development
communication”) and were implemented in the
third world during the 1960s and 1970s. Programs
promoting immunization, family planning, various
agricultural reforms, and nutrition were conducted
in numerous countries in Africa, Asia, and South
America during the 1970s. These built on some of
the experiences of agricultural development
supported by the U.S.
Agency for International Development
(USAID), as well as on the community-based
family planning programs initiated by the Ford
Foundation and the Population Council in the late
1960s out of frustration with the slow diffusion of
clinically based family planning services.
International programs soon began to incorporate
marketing techniques, including radio, mass media,
and advertising, on a wide scale. Family planning
program designers, for example, initially began to
break out of their clinical mold to experiment with
distributing contraceptives through pharmacies and
small shops, and ultimately evolved systems of
market segmentation, mass communication, and
product placement to accomplish wider and more
efficient distribution of subsidized contraceptives.
The first nationwide contraceptive social marketing
program, the Nirodh condom project in India,
began in 1967 with funding from the Ford
Foundation.
USAID increased its funding of contraceptive
social marketing projects in the 1970s, supporting
projects in Kenya, Colombia, Sri Lanka, and
Jamaica.
In fact, much of the important research and
development done to advance social marketing
applications to health has taken place in the
international family planning field. The child
survival movement has become a new center of
gravity for USAID-funded international social
marketing of oral rehydration products to combat
the effects of diarrhea.
Efforts to reduce cardiovascular disease risk
also began to adapt elements of social marketing
in another sphere. This trend was evident in the
North Karelia, Finland, community-based heart
disease prevention program, initiated in the early
1970s; in the National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute (NHLBI)-sponsored national campaigns to
reduce levels first of hypertension and then of
cholesterol; and in the several generations of
community based heart disease prevention
programs sponsored by the NHLBI. Some of these
programs used the term social marketing and
overtly set out to apply and adapt technology from
the business sector, while others borrowed a few
marketing concepts or approaches without fully
embracing the language and ethos of marketing.
In addition, numerous smoking cessation and
prevention programs over the past two decades
have experimented with applications of marketing
techniques; substance abuse specialists have
incorporated elements of social marketing and
public relations more recently in community
prevention programs. The Center for Substance
Abuse Prevention conducts training workshops on
social marketing and health communication. Other
federal government agencies, notably the National
Cancer Institute (NCI) through its Office of Cancer
Communications, also have been actively involved
in advancing the practice of social marketing. (4)
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES OF SOCIAL
MARKETING
Strategic aim:
Increase the impact and effectiveness of
health-related programmes and campaigns at
national and local levels, by ensuring that social
marketing principles are adopted and
systematically applied
Strategic objectives:
1. Achieve an enhanced consumer-focused
approach based on social marketing principles
and practice that puts the consumer at the
centre of all development and delivery work
2. Increase the effective use of resources, and
their overall impact, by better mobilising
available assets and developing a diverse
resource base
3. Enhance DH leadership, prioritisation and
development of its expert commissioning role
4. Build capacity and skills to integrate social
marketing within existing strategies and
interventions at national and local level
5. Reconfigure research and evaluation
approaches to ensure movement towards
behavioural goals can be assessed, and to
systematically capture and share learning. (5)
WHAT ARE ITS KEY FEATURES?
The following six features and concepts are
key to understand social marketing
JOURNAL OF THE INDIAN ASSOCIATION OF
PUBLIC HEALTH DENTISTRY Vol:2011 ISSUE:18 SUPPL. II
816
[Downloaded free from http://www.jiaphd.org on Friday, March 2, 2018, IP: 117.239.56.101]
Fig. Consumer Triangle Model
Customer or consumer orientation: A
strong ’customer’ orientation with import; attached
to understanding where the customer is starting
from their knowledge and beliefs, along with the
social context in which they live and work.
Behaviour and behavioural goals: Clear
focus on understanding existing behavioural key
influences upon it, alongside developing clear
behavioural goals. These can be actionable and
measurable steps or stages, phased overtime
’Intervention mix’ and ’marketing mix’:
Using a mix of different interventions on to
achieve a particular behavioural goal. When used
at the strategic level this is commonly referred to
as the ’Intervention Mix’, and when used
operationally it is described as ’marketing mix’.
Audience segmentation:Clarity of audience
focus using audience segmentation effectively.
’Exchange’ Use of the ’exchange’ concept
understanding what is being expected from people
and the real cost to them.
Competition: Use of the ’competition’
concept. This means understanding factors impact
on people and that compete for their attention and
time. (5)
Like commercial marketing, the primary focus
is on the consumer-on learning what the people
want and need rather than trying to persuade them
to buy what we happen to be producing. Marketing
talks to the customer, not about the product. The
process takes the consumer focus into account by
addressing the elements of the “marketing mix”.
This refers to decisions about:
1. The conception of the Product
2. Price
3. Distibution (Place)
4. Promotion
These are often called a“4Ps” of marketing.
1. PRODUCT:
The social marketing “PRODUCT” is not
necessarily a physical offering. A continuum of
products exists, ranging from tangible, physical
products (eg.condoms), to services (eg. medical
exams), practices (breast feeding, eating a
heart-healthy diet) and finally, more intangible idea
(eg. Environmental protection). In order to have a
viable product, people must first perceive that they
have a genuine problem, and that the product
offering is a good solution for that problem. The
role of research here is to discover consumer’s
perceptions of the problem and the product, and
determine how important they feel it is to take
action against the problem.
2. PRICE:
“PRICE”refers to what the consumer must do
in order to obtain the social marketing product.
The cost may be monetary, or it may instead
require the consumer to give up intangibles, such
as time or effort or the risk embarrassment and
disapproval. If the cost out weigh the benefits of
an individual, the perceived value of the offering
will be low and it will be unlikely to be adopted.
However, if the benefits are perceived as greater
than their costs, chances of trial and adoption of
the product is much greater.
3. PLACE:
“PLACE” describes the way that the product
reaches the consumer. For eg. a tangible product,
this refers to the distribution system—including the
warehouse, trucks, sales force, retail outlets where
it is sold, or places where it is given out for free.
For an intangible product, place is less clear cut,
but refers to decisions about the channels through
which consumers are reached with information or
training. This may include doctors’ office,
shopping malls, mass media vehicles or in home
demonstrations. Another element of place is
deciding how to ensure accessibility of the offering
and quality of the service delivery. By determining
JOURNAL OF THE INDIAN ASSOCIATION OF
PUBLIC HEALTH DENTISTRY Vol:2011 ISSUE:18 SUPPL. II
817
[Downloaded free from http://www.jiaphd.org on Friday, March 2, 2018, IP: 117.239.56.101]
the activities and habits of the target audience, as
well as their experience and satisfaction with the
existing delivery system, researchers can pin point
the most deal means of distributing if the offering.
4. PROMOTION
Finally the last “P” is the PROMOTION.
Because of its visibility, this element is often
mistakenly thought of as comprising the whole of
social marketing. However, as can be seen by the
previous discussion, it is only one piece.
Promotion consists of the integrated use of the
advertising, public relations, promotions, media
advocacy, personal selling and entertainment
vehicles. The focus is on creating and sustaining
demand of the product. Public service
announcements or paid ads are one way, but there
are other methods such as coupons, media events,
editorials. Research is crucial to determine the
most effective vehicles to reach the target audience
and increase demand. The primary research
findings themselves can also be used to gain
publicity fir the program at media events and in
news stories.
ADDITIONAL SOCIAL MARKETING “P’s’’
PUBLICS: Social marketers often have many
different audiences that their program has to
address in order to be successful. “Publics” refers
to both the external and internal groups involved
in the program. External publics include the target
audience, secondary audience, policymakers and
gatekeepers, while the internal publics are those
who are involved in some way either approval or
implementation of the program.
PARTNERSHIP: Social and health issues are
often so complex that one agency can’t make a
dent by itself. You need to team up with other
organizations in the community to really be
effective. You really need to figure out which
organizations have similar goals to yours—not
necessary the same goals—and identify ways you
can work together.
POLICY: Social marketing programs can do
well in motivating individual behavior change, but
that is difficult to sustain unless the environment
they’re in supports that change for the long run.
Often, policy change is needed, and media
advocacy programs can be an effective
complement to a social marketing program.
PURSE STRINGS: Most organizations that
develop social marketing programs operate through
funds provided by sources such as foundations,
governmental grants or donations. This adds
another dimension to the strategy
development-namely, where will you get the
money to create your program? (5)
WHAT ARE THE KEY STAGES INVOLVED?
In line with all good planning and
development tools, social marketing it has key
stages.
Diagram below summarizes these in our ‘total
process planning model’.
Most of these stages will be familiar to anyone
involved in project or programme development.
However, we particularly highlight the importance
of the ’ front end’ scoping stage which may drive
the whole process.
The primary concern here is with establishing
clear actionable and measurable behaviour goals to
ensure focused development across the rest of the
process.
The ultimate effectiveness and success of
social marketing rests on whether it is possible to
demonstrate direct impact on behaviour. It is this
feature that sets it apart from other communication
or awareness raising approaches, where the main
focus is on highlighting the information and
helping people to understand it.
Fig. KEY STAGES
DISCUSSION
The term social marketing was first coined by
Kotler and Zaltman in 1971 to refer to the
application of marketing to the solution of social
and health problems. Many social and health
problems have behavioural causes: the spread of
AIDS, tobacco use, traffic accidents and unwanted
pregnancies are all the result of everyday,
voluntary human activity.
Social marketing, like generic marketing, is
not a theory in itself. Rather, it is a framework or
JOURNAL OF THE INDIAN ASSOCIATION OF
PUBLIC HEALTH DENTISTRY Vol:2011 ISSUE:18 SUPPL. II
818
[Downloaded free from http://www.jiaphd.org on Friday, March 2, 2018, IP: 117.239.56.101]
structure that draws from many other bodies of
knowledge such as psychology, sociology,
anthropology and communications theory to
understand how to influence people’s behaviour
(Kotler and Zaltman, l97l). It involves changing
intractable behaviours, in complex economic,
social and political climates with often very
limited resources. As the dividing lines are rarely
clear it is important not to confuse social
marketing with commercial marketing. A
commercial marketer selling a product may only
seek to influence a buyer to make a product
purchase. Social marketers, dealing with goals
such as reducing cigarette smoking or encouraging
condom use, have more difficult goals: to make
potentially difficult and long-term behavioural
change in target populations
Social marketing provides the health educator
with a unique opportunity to bridge the
communication gaps between the audience and the
authorities; between educational assumption and
popular perception; educational content and
marketplace reality; between dissonant messages
from other responsible agencies: the health care
system and those who are unmotivated to use the
system; and it tackles the competition between
curative services and prevention.
A number of social marketing programmes for
health have been undertaken in the developed and
developing countries. The issues include promoting
the usage of contraceptives, immunization, family
planning and better nutrition. The Government of
India under the National Family Welfare
Programme supplies contraceptives, namely
condoms, Copper-T and Oral Contraceptive Pills,
free of cost to the users through State
Governments, under the Free Supply Scheme.
However, this four decade-old programme has
developed weaknesses like irregular distribution,
government infrastructure catering to needs
without a user friendly approach and a low
perception among users about the quality of such
freebies. Therefore, in. order to change the
mind-set of consumers so as to generate
self-driven willingness to use contraceptives, the
Social Marketing Programme (SMP) of condoms
was launched in 1968 followed by Oral
Contraceptive Pills (OCPs) in 1987.One of the
earliest and least successful programmes
undertaken by the Government of India. In 5 years
the use of these two contraceptives under SMP has
recorded an increase of about 150 percent. After
more than three decades, the Government of India
is still grappling with the problem. In 1968 Martin
criticized the Government of India for mishandling
of the family planning programme of the early
stages. He pointed that, ’family planning is not a
medical problem but a marketing problem’ and
asserted," Only a marketing man can save India".(6)
A number of studies were carried out using
social marketing strategies to improve the health
of people by adopting healthy food and lifestyle.
Studies were done to help realize the full potential
of effective social marketing in contributing to
national and local efforts to improve health and
reduce health inequalities. Overall the findings
demonstrate that social marketing interventions can
increase levels of physical activity and knowledge
of the benefits, and dangers of inactivity. The
majority of studies reported at least one significant
behavioural change in a desired direction. Many
of the study populations (and samples taken from
them) were focused on minority groups, limiting
the generalisability of findings to wider
populations. One limitation of studies in this area
is the lack of a universally used and accepted
measure of levels of physical activity. This causes
problems in comparing across interventions and
extrapolating conclusions. It may be more useful
to compare exact like for like interventions using
the same outcome measures for level of physical
activity but for a review of this nature this would
not be appropriate. (6)
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
(WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund
(LINICEF) have for many years emphasized
the importance of maintaining the practice of
breast-feeding and of reviving the practice where
it is in decline as a way to improve the health and
nutrition of infants and young children. Efforts to
promote breast-feeding and to overcome problems
that might discourage it are a part of the overall
nutrition and maternal and child health
programmes of both organizations. A number of
studies were done using social marketing strategies
to encourage breast feeding. A study Be A Star
showed increase in breastfeeding initiation rates
within the target group. Another study Get Closer
showed a increase in breastfeeding initiation rates
across the target area.
HIV and education intervention using Social
marketing campaigns can influence perceptions of
disease and resulting behaviour change. Campaigns
about HIV preventions show how important the
JOURNAL OF THE INDIAN ASSOCIATION OF
PUBLIC HEALTH DENTISTRY Vol:2011 ISSUE:18 SUPPL. II
819
[Downloaded free from http://www.jiaphd.org on Friday, March 2, 2018, IP: 117.239.56.101]
conceptual scientific and Civic illiteracies can be
in encouraging behaviour change. A recent study
compares the impact of HIV prevention campaigns
in Uganda and South Africa (Epstein 2007). The
openness of government encourage widespread,
frank conversations with family, friends and
neighbours, not about sex, but about the effects of
AIDS. People saw HIV not as a disease affecting
disreputable high risk groups but as a Shared
catamity affecting everyone and this personalised
the disease and the consequences could have for
individuals and the people they cared for.
Individual set up self help groups to care for
orphans and home-help for adults with HIV .(8)
A study Will Balbir Pasha get AIDS?’ showed
increase in proportion of individuals reporting
last-time condom usage with commercial sex
workers increase in retail sales of condoms in the
Red Light District and an increase in Voluntary
Counseling and Treatment services usage. .(9)
A number of studies have used social
marketing in improving oral health. A study More
Smiling Faces in Beautiful Places showed that in
six rural South Carolina counties, the percentage
of Medicaid/SCHIP eligible children age 6 and
under who received dental services increased from
25.5 percent in 2002 to 30.2 percent in 2006, a
statistically significant difference. In the six rural
counties, the percentage of Medicaid/SCHIP
eligible children with special health care needs age
20 and under who received dental care rose from
46.7 percent in 2002 to 55.4 percent in 2005 (the
latest year for which data is available), also a
statistically significant difference showed an
increase in the number of people who received
dental services..(10)
Vermont’s social marketing campaign, "Smile
Vermont." used focus group findings to develop a
survey to evaluate the effectiveness of the media
campaign. The results showed that Vermont
doubled the number of schools participating in its
Tooth Tutor Dental Access program to include
almost half (45 percent) of the schools in the
state. Almost 100 percent of the families that
actively engaged in the Smile Vermont campaign
by attending events or using the Web site or
hotline reported improvement in their knowledge
of oral health practices. Another social marketing
project “Are you spoon-feeding tooth decay?”
aimed to increase awareness among low income
with children ages birth to three years that dental
decay is an infectious disease that can be
transmitted from mother to child and to reduce
behaviours that may transmit the strep mutans
bacteria. The results showed that the awareness
campaigns long-term impact is more significant .(11)
Approximately 75% of all oral cavity and
pharyngeal cancers-mouth, tongue, lips, throat,
parts of the nose, and larynx-are attributed to the
use of smoked and smokeless tobacco, according
to the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Those who choose to use cigarettes, cigars,
pipes, chewing tobacco, snuff, and/or bidis place
themselves at a much higher risk of developing
oral cancer and other diseases. Studies also have
linked chronic alcohol use to oral cancer.
Researchers believe that chronic alcohol use,
combined with the use of tobacco products,
multiplies the risk. In addition, sun exposure is a
risk factor for lip cancer.
Cochrane Review of mass media interventions
for preventing smoking in young people found two
out of six interventions effective; and a Cochrane
Review of high quality school-based programmes
for preventing smoking found eight out of 15
studies effective.
A study Give It Up For Baby has been more
successful than previous approaches. The reason
may be free Nicotine Replacement Therapy, as
well as receiving an incentive. This must have
encouraged the smokers to quit. Another study
Mobile Phones and the Internet as Quitting
Smoking Aids showed that the programme was
successful. A study Quit for a New Life, out to
reduce smoking in pregnancy rates showed results
which is statistically significant.
A number of studies were done to create
awareness among the people about the adverse
effects of alcohol on the overall health and alcohol
related accidents. A study Road Crew was
successful in preventing alcohol related crashes. A
study Pssst! Be Alcohol Aware showed positive
trends in the drinking behaviours of cabin visitors
compared to the general student population.(12)
Studies were also done to make the people
aware about mouth cancer. Most of the studies had
a significant effect on them. A study Spreading the
Word about Mouth Cancer showed the campaign
raised awareness of mouth cancer, improved
knowledge and understanding of symptoms and
encouraged people from a ’hard to reach’ audience
to attend their dentist, doctor or pharmacist if
concerned about symptoms. Another study ’Early
Presentation of Cancer Symptoms’ increase in
awareness of cancer symptoms, A Study ’Love
JOURNAL OF THE INDIAN ASSOCIATION OF
PUBLIC HEALTH DENTISTRY Vol:2011 ISSUE:18 SUPPL. II
820
[Downloaded free from http://www.jiaphd.org on Friday, March 2, 2018, IP: 117.239.56.101]
Your Mouth’ was also successful in creating
awareness.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
Beginning in the mid-1970s the belief began
to take hold that most of what we must do in this
country to improve health on a meaningful scale
is to persuade all to make enduring changes in
their personal habits and lifestyles: to reduce
drinking, modify diet, become physically active,
quit smoking and using drugs, seek out screening
and preventive health services, and generally
exercise caution-on the highways, in sexual
encounters, in handling anger and stress, on the
job, out in the sun, wherever danger attends. Over
the past two decades social marketing has come
of age as a consumer-focused approach to the
question of how to “go to scale” in efforts to
conserve and advance the health of the
population.The, scientific findings onsocial
marketing effectiveness are particularly interesting
as they contribute to the reduction ofsocial
problems.
To successfully market programs and ideas
one must understand the directions in which
society is moving. Recognizing public attitudes
will help you implement a solid social marketing
program. A critical part of social marketing is
thinking creatively. Apply creativity to every
campaign and program, and don’t rely on a single
strategy for success. Plan your campaign carefully,
be authentic, be original. Also in today’s
non-profit market, most projects require a
scientifically developed needs assessment, a
monitoring process throughout the project, and a
formal evaluation upon conclusion. And also social
marketing over a period of time has proved to be
a strong tool in improving oral health of people
across the world. Various studies have been
conducted using social marketing strategy, the
outcome of which has shown positive impact on
the oral health of the study population. Hence this
strategy of social marketing can be adapted in
improving the oral health of the people across the
world, especially in country like India.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Marketing Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.-http:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marketing-Accessed 12 June
2009
2. Social Marketing Wikipedia- The Free
Encyclopedia-http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_mar
keting-Accessed 28 June 2009
3. Yahoo.Answers.in - http://in.answers.yahoo.com
/-Accessed 12 Sep 2009
4. Social Marketing For Public Health by Diana
Chapman Walsh, Rima E. Rudd, Barbara A.
Moeykens, and Thomas W. Moloney.
5. National Social Marketing Centre.-http://www.
nsmcentre.org.uk/-Accessed 12 Jan 2010
6. National Strategy for Social Marketing
DRAFT November 2001 Department of Family
Welfare Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Government of India.
7. National Social Marketing Centre – Report 3 Martine
Stead, Laura McDermott, Ross Gordon, Kathryn
Angus and Gerard Hastings Institute for Social
Marketing, University of Stirling& The Open
University 2006.
8. Show Case Social Marketing Case Studies
http://www.nsmcentre.org.uk/resources/showcase-Acc
essed 12 Mar 2010
9. Cases in Public Health Communication and Marketing
volume 3, summer 2009.
10. National Social Marketing Centre – Report 1 Ross
Gordon, Laura McDermott, Martine Stead,Kathryn
Angus and Gerard Hastings Institute for Social
Marketing,University of Stirling& The Open
University2006.
11. A for Effort an Oral Health America Special Grading
Project Feb 2005.
12. Health Literacy Review Paper- Dr Karen Jachelson.
A study commissioned by the National Social
Marketing Centre.
JOURNAL OF THE INDIAN ASSOCIATION OF
PUBLIC HEALTH DENTISTRY Vol:2011 ISSUE:18 SUPPL. II
821
[Downloaded free from http://www.jiaphd.org on Friday, March 2, 2018, IP: 117.239.56.101]