Chapter 3
Determinants, Context, and
Consequences for Individual
and Social Change
Effective solutions must take a variety of concerns into account; just like this Cartagena,
Columbia, intersection, which must accommodate public transportation, taxis, outdoor
vendors, and pedestrians. (Image courtesy of the author.)
Learning Objectives
 Discuss five ways in which theories can influence the design and imple-
mentation of a social marketing program.
 Describe how concepts such as vital behaviors and advocacy can be incor-
porated into social marketing programs.
 Understand how the micro-macro problem presents unique challenges in
developing social change programs.
 Identify social theories and strategies that can guide social marketing and
social change efforts.
 Recognize how social marketing can be used to address larger issues of the
role of marketing in society.
Social marketing has been presented and understood as an approach
to individual behavior change in which psychological stage models, such as
the transtheoretical model (Prochaska & DiClemente, 1983), are used to
segment audiences, and the marketing mix is used to identify and reduce barriers
or costs and increase benefits for behavior change (Andreasen, 1995; Kotler &
Lee, 2008; Lee & Kotler, 2011). This theory has guided many marketers’
approach to discovering what the desired behavior might be, its possible deter-
minants, the context in which it occurs—or not—and the consequences that
people and society incur. I offer that to fully develop the discipline of social
marketing and its promise to be a positive force for social change, we must think
about change as it occurs among groups of people (segments, social networks)
and at different levels of society (organizations, communities, physical environ-
ments, markets, and public policies). This perspective builds on the discussion of
macromarketing in chapter 2 and helps us to use the micro-macro dilemma as a
framework for building scale into our efforts. Overall, this chapter looks at the
ways in which social marketing has been incorporating theories of social capital,
community development, social diffusion, and social networks to develop change
strategies that are well suited to the wicked problems we need to address.
This discussion of theories for change presumes that all marketing involves
the reciprocal influence of the behaviors of a variety of actors who are known by
such labels as audiences, influencers, stakeholders, consumers, suppliers, partners,
and policymakers. Depending on the actor and the objective of the program,
76  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
marketers may be trying to increase some behaviors (healthy eating, physical
activity, recycling), decrease other behaviors (tobacco use, risky sexual behaviors,
energy use), encourage participation in social change activities (citizen engagement,
social mobilization), or gain support for environmental change (adopt policies,
redesign such physical entities as automobile safety features or entertainment
content). The people who are the focus of these activities and the changes they are
asked to make are largely a function of the framework (or theory of change) that
marketers bring to the task. In the following section, I review some of the common
frameworks employed by social marketers for many different puzzles.
WHY USE THEORY?
Everyone has assumptions and explanations about how and why people think and
behave the way they do; these are often referred to as naive or commonsense
theories (Heider, 1958; Nisbett & Bellows, 1977; Reisenzein & Rudolph, 2008;
Watts, 2011). These theories are often rooted in an individual’s culture and might,
for example, present themselves in discussions of whether people will accept
voluntary counseling and testing and the provision of antiretroviral therapies for
HIV/AIDS (Roura et al., 2009), the types of foods people will eat—or not—
(Kumanyika, 2008), or the ways in which people will conserve energy (Nolan,
Schultz, Cialdini, Goldstein & Griskevicius, 2008).
Many social change agents are familiar with the difficulties of addressing other
people’s cultural beliefs as they relate to health and social behaviors; we need to
remind ourselves that we are just as susceptible to the influence of our own
commonsense theories as we design social marketing programs. This is why many
social marketers stress the need to base programs on empirically validated models
and theories in order to understand and influence the many variables that affect
human behavior (Blair-Stevens, Reynolds & Christopoulos, 2010; Donovan &
Henley, 2010; Hastings, 2007; Lefebvre, 2001; Novelli, 1990). Theories, whether
based on common sense, past experience, or empirical evidence, create frameworks
for our work. Specifically, they serve to
 Explain how or why things are related
 Guide us in identifying what we ought to focus on
 Suggest what questions we should ask
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  77
 Lead us to assumptions about what we should do about the problem
 Suggest the types of outcomes we should set
 Determine how we measure success
Some people brush aside discussions of theory as something best left to
academics. Yet using the wrong theory to understand a problem and develop
strategies to address it is one of the primary sources of program failures (Hornik,
1998). As a planning system, social marketing can incorporate and blend into
program development an understanding of, or theory about, individual and group
behaviors (cf. DiClemente, Crosby & Kegler, 2009; Glanz, Rimer & Viswanath,
2008; Kahneman, 2011), social systems and policy development (cf. Stone, 1997),
and healthy environments (cf. Jackson, 2012).
SOCIAL MARKETING DECISION POINTS WHERE
THEORY CAN MAKE A DIFFERENCE
Theory can help you choose appropriately when you are deciding
 What problem to tackle—and how
 How to segment populations
 What the program objectives should be
 Which priority audiences to choose, and how to characterize them
 What questions to ask in formative research
 What program strategies and tactics to use
 How to develop and test these strategies and tactics
 Which messages may best resonate with specific groups of people
 Which benefits and barriers are most in need of attention
 How to best promote behaviors, messages, products, and services
Source: Adapted from Lefebvre, 2001.
78  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
Among the more popular theories and models used in social marketing pro-
grams are the stages of change model (Prochaska & DiClemente, 1983), health belief
model (Rosenstock, Strecher & Becker, 1988), social-cognitive theory (Bandura,
1986), and diffusion of innovations theory (Rogers, 1995). Table 3.1 presents some
of the key variables of each of these theories that are used to explain and change
behavior, and illustrative strategies for each one.
All of these theories stress attention to internal processes such as cognitions
(what people think and perceive), appraisals of costs and benefits, and expectations
of consequences for maintaining or changing behavior. Skills development is also
explicitly part of the learning of new behaviors, whether that is done by observing
others or through direct experience. As noted earlier, these are the most commonly
cited theories that guide social marketing efforts (Lefebvre, 2001). We should not be
surprised then that most social marketing programs focus almost exclusively on
individual behavior change. It is only when we switch to social-cognitive and diffusion
theories that we begin to consider aspects of a person’s “outside world,” or environ-
ment, in solving the puzzles that are presented to us. Each of these theories offers
certain perspectives on change that are important for some social marketing efforts;
certainly tactics such as providing reminders to act, correcting misperceptions about
threats, and increasing the salience of benefits or positive consequences for change
should not be tossed out of the social marketing toolbox just because the theory they
come from is not the primary one being used in our program. Rather, I recommend
that you consider the benefits of eclectic theorizing—using the parts of theories that
best fit the people and puzzle you are faced with, rather than forcing people and
context into one understanding and approach and ignoring other alternatives.
In the next sections, I look at models that integrate research from a variety of
perspectives to guide social change efforts and establish new fronts in solving
puzzles of human behavior and social change.
Vital Behaviors and Sources of Influence
Patterson, Grenny, Maxfield, McMillan, and Switzler (2008) take the essentials of
the social-cognitive approach and focus on the idea of identifying vital behaviors
that will drive a big change or lead to a cascade of changes. These vital behaviors
can be identified through research and by observing what the people who already
engage in the desired behavior (the positive deviants) do; the ways in which people
who once practiced the behavior, relapsed and then returned to it, managed this
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  79
TABLE 3.1 Key explanatory variables and sample actions of theories often used
in social marketing programs
Theory or
model
Variable Description
Stages of
change
Precontemplation People are not aware of risk and/or not thinking about
changing their behavior. (Need to raise their awareness
and recommend a solution.)
Contemplation People are aware of risk and concerned and
knowledgeable about alternative behaviors and choices.
(Help them to identify perceived barriers and see the
benefits of adopting new behaviors, making other choices.)
Preparation People are motivated to change and may be making plans to
do so—often measured as intention to change in next
6 months. (Provide information to increase perceived
benefits of action; provide information and support to make
change; use social groups to model and motivate action.)
Action People are engaging in new behaviors and making new
choices. (Provide opportunities to reinforce and improve
skills; emphasize benefits of new behavior; reduce
barriers through problem solving; create environmental
and social supports for continuing new behaviors and
choices.)
Maintenance People continue to engage in new behaviors for at least
6 months. (Remind them of the benefits of new behavior;
increase their confidence that they can sustain it; increase
or maintain environmental and social supports.)
Health
belief model
Susceptibility People perceive vulnerability to threat or harm from
behaviors and choices. (Use information and emotional
appeals to increase their sense of personal susceptibility.)
Severity People perceive the negative consequences of engaging in
behaviors or making choices. (Use information and
imagery to make the consequences more immediate and
harmful.)
Threat People perceive a combination of perceived susceptibility
and threat. (Increase both perceived susceptibility and
severity to motivate action while not overwhelming people
to the point where denial or fatalism results in inaction and
withdrawal.)
80  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
TABLE 3.1 (Continued)
Theory or
model
Variable Description
Perceived
benefits
Beliefs that various actions can reduce personal
susceptibility to a threat or to the consequences (severity).
(Provide information and social models for experiencing
the benefits of new behaviors and choices.)
Perceived
barriers
Beliefs about the tangible, psychological, and social costs
for changing behaviors and choices. (Use reassurance;
correct misinformation about threat; provide incentives
and social and environmental supports for action.)
Cues to action Prompts and reminders to take new actions or make other
choices. (Use point-of-choice programs and reminder
systems of various types.)
Social-
cognitive
theory
Reciprocal
determinism
Behavior changes result from interaction between person
and environment; change is bidirectional. (Involve the
individual and relevant others; work to change the
environment, if warranted.)
Behavioral
capability
Knowledge and skills to perform or engage in the desired
behavior. (Provide information and training about action.)
Expectations Beliefs about the likely results of actions and choices.
(Incorporate information about the likely results of action
in advice.)
Self-efficacy Confidence in ability to take action and persist in it. (Point
out strengths; use persuasion and encouragement;
approach behavior change in small steps to maximize
opportunities for success; increase confidence.)
Observational
learning
Observing others who are like oneself engaging in desired
behavior and/or seeing the results they have from
engaging in new behaviors or making different choices.
(Point out others’ experience; make positive consequences
[incentives] visible; identify role models to emulate.)
Reinforcement Responses to a person’s behavior that increase or decrease
the chances of recurrence. (Provide incentives and
rewards; encourage self-rewards; decrease the possibility
of negative social and environmental responses that may
deter new behaviors and choices.)
(Continued )
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  81
recovery; and the best practices of people who consistently engage in the desired
behavior. Patterson et al. describe some of the vital behaviors that have been
identified. For example, for people with diabetes the key behaviors are to test their
blood sugar four times a day and adjust their insulin appropriately to keep blood
glucose under tight control. For improving customer satisfaction in health care
settings, it is vital for staff to smile, make eye contact, identify themselves, let
people know what they are doing and why, and end each interaction with a patient
or family member by asking, “Is there anything else that you need?” For successful
weight loss, research shows that exercising on home equipment, eating breakfast,
and weighing oneself daily are the significant predictors of long-term maintenance
TABLE 3.1 Key explanatory variables and sample actions of theories often used
in social marketing programs (Continued)
Theory or
model
Variable Description
Diffusion of
innovations
Relative
advantage
New behaviors (ideas, products, services, or programs) will
be adopted only if they are seen as offering economic,
social, utilitarian, or other advantages over current ones.
(Focus on personal or organizational benefits and compare
them with current outcomes of choices and behaviors.)
Compatibility New choices and behaviors must be relevant and fit into
everyday routines, self-perceptions, and values. (Design
new behaviors, products, and services to serve user needs
and lifestyles; allow adopters to alter or modify offerings to
fit their own needs and context.)
Complexity New behaviors and choices that are seen as easy to do and
make are more likely to be successfully adopted.
(Approach change in incremental steps; tailor offerings to
unique personal and social characteristics.)
Trialability People adopt behaviors, products, and services they can
try out first. (Offer people opportunities to try new
products, services, and behaviors without explicit long-
term commitments; run pilot projects.)
Observability Benefits of new behaviors and choices need to be easily
identified and visible to others. (Promote new behaviors
via storytelling and case studies; create short-term,
tangible benefits.)
82  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
of weight loss. It is the vital behaviors that should become the targets of social
marketing programs, not the at-risk behaviors that dominate much of the practice.
Patterson et al. (2008) also look at the sources of influences on people’s behavior.
As shown in figure 3.1, the ability and motivation to engage in any behavior is
influenced by personal, structural, and social variables. A person’s perception of
his or her own ability comes down to the question of self-efficacy: Can I do it?
Patterson et al. propose that to influence self-efficacy, we must create experiences
that encourage people to surpass their limits (personal), change their environment
(structural), and find strength in numbers (social). With respect to motivation, the
question becomes, Is it worth it? To influence motivation, we must focus on
making the behavior desirable, designing rewards and accountability to encourage
and support new behaviors, and mobilizing positive peer influence.
This approach to behavior change admittedly simplifies the process. And
although many change agents will present elaborate theories to use when designing
a behavior change program, I suggest that the heuristic depicted in table 3.2 can be
used to judge the potential of a program to influence changes in people’s behavior.
Learning New Behaviors Versus Changing Them
Many social marketers and change agents assume that they should approach the
task of improving personal and social well-being as a process of behavior
FIGURE 3.1 Sources of influence on behavior
Personal
Ability and
Motivation
SocialStructural
Source: Patterson et al., 2008.
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  83
change—of somehow influencing, persuading, cajoling, or forcing people to do
something differently. Yet how would we feel if someone approached us and asked
us to change? The questions and resistance would be immediate. Yet somehow
our common sense (our personal set of theories) dictates that we do it this way.
However, what would happen if we approached it from the point of view of
the person we would like to help? We might ask that person, “Can I help you
learn something new that might help you solve a problem better than what
you are doing now?” The response might be very different and positive.
As it happens there is good science behind learning, much of it incorporated
into the social-cognitive approach of Bandura (1986). The basic process of learning
is outlined in figure 3.2. It includes (1) experiencing models that are appealing and
relevant to our engaging in the desired behavior (whether these models are observed
directly or vicariously through audiovisual and print media), (2) paying attention,
(3) remembering the behavior, (4) believing we can do the same thing, (5) wanting
to do it, and (6) then matching our performance of the new behavior with the
model—but not having to try for perfection, at least at the beginning.
Table 3.3 displays some of the key research findings that can guide our
programs through each stage of the learning process. Once we have decided on
the desired or vital behavior to target, the table provides a framework for assessing
and refining program design and implementation at the tactical level. As you can
see, many of the elements reflect what this chapter has already discussed in
relation to other theories of behavior change and diffusion.
TABLE 3.2 Heuristic for judging approaches to changing behavior
Sources of
influence
Ability (Can I do it?) Motivation (Is it worth it?)
Personal Are we encouraging people to
surpass their limits?
Are we making the new behavior or
choice desirable?
Structural How are we changing the
environment to increase confidence
in being able to do new behavior?
What rewards, self-monitoring, and
feedback do we have in our program to
encourage and support new behavior?
Social How are we finding and using
strength in numbers to build
confidence in abilities and positive
outcomes?
How are we mobilizing and harnessing
peer pressure to encourage and support
behavior change?
84  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
An Integrative Model of Behavior Prediction
The integrative theory proposed by Fishbein and Yzer (2003) illustrates the idea
of eclectic theorizing though its incorporation of three theories: the health belief
model, social-cognitive theory, and the theory of reasoned action. Fishbein and
Yzer developed this integrative theory for change agents to use to guide their decision
making when developing interventions and determining who the priority groups
will be, what the objectives should be, and what will make the program most suc-
cessful. In this model (see figure 3.3), whether a specific behavior is performed
depends upon (1) the person’s intention to engage in that behavior, (2) whether the
person has the requisite skills and abilities to perform the behavior, and (3) whether
there are environmental constraints on performing the behavior.
To take an example from a family-planning project I was involved with, the
stated objective was to improve the likelihood that young adult women would
engage in family-planning behaviors and use appropriate products and services.
FIGURE 3.2 How people learn most of the time
Modeled
behavior
Pay attention
Remember it
Can do it
Want to do it
Match it
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  85
TABLE 3.3 Tactical steps to increase learning of new behaviors
Learning requirement Tactics
Paying attention to the
behavior
Make the behavior important to people at the moment (it fits
preconceptions, interests).
Let it move them emotionally.
Make sure it’s not too complicated.
Make it ubiquitous or frequent.
Show how it’s useful to solve a problem (cope with the
environment).
Remembering the behavior Convert information to images and easily used words,
phrases, and slogans.
Create “rules” (“do this when . . . ”) or a prototype behavior
(“eat five a day”).
Help people learn to talk themselves through situations,
feelings, and so forth.
Have them rehearse the behavior—mentally (cognitively) or
in actual practice.
Having the ability to enact
the behavior
Let people see themselves doing it.
Support opportunities to practice it (get better at it).
Enable the necessary component skills to do it (within
biological and physical constraints).
Give or provide feedback (intrinsic and extrinsic); make the
unobservable observable (performance feedback).
Wanting to do the behavior Help people see that the new behavior has greater functional
value or carries a lower risk of negative consequences than
the current one.
Understand that performing a new behavior results from
three types of incentives:
The allure of direct, tangible rewards
Observed or vicarious rewards (experience though others)
Self-produced rewards
Comparing oneself with the
modeled or desired
behavior
Help people understand the difference between the desirable
or aspirational behavior and what’s relevant and possible in
their lives.
Create a context for their behaviors.
Let them gradually learn the rules and shape the behavior in
small steps rather than try to master it all at once.
Make observable features for them to pay attention to
(self-monitoring tools).
86  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
Using the integrative model to understand how we might influence the use of
family-planning products and services, my colleagues and I first looked at what
environmental constraints might be preventing our priority group from accessing
the services or using the products. Second, we assessed through interviews and
focus groups whether women from the priority group had the necessary skills to
purchase and effectively use family-planning methods. Expecting from the theory
that these women might not have strong intentions to perform the behavior, we
also used these interviews and groups to explore their (1) attitudes toward per-
forming the behaviors, (2) perceived norms about performing the behaviors, and
(3) perceived self-efficacy, or confidence, in being able to perform the behaviors
(including scheduling appointments at a family-planning clinic, keeping the
appointments, purchasing or receiving free pregnancy prevention products, and
then using them consistently). The theory suggests that attitudes, norms, and self-
efficacy are affected by a host of possible determinants that will vary by each specific
behavior, by the characteristics of the women (or subgroups of them), and by the
context (especially the environmental constraints) in which each behavior is to be
performed. Among the major determinants of these expectations are culture,
FIGURE 3.3 An integrative model of behavior prediction
Distal variables
Demographics
Culture
Attitudes toward
them
(stereotypes,
stigma)
Personality and
emotions
Other individual
variables
(perceived risk,
sensation seeking)
Exposure to
media and other
interventions
Behavioral
beliefs and
outcome
valuations
Attitude
Normative
beliefs and
motivation
to comply
Efficacy
beliefs Self-efficacy
Environmental
constraints
Intention
Perceived
norm
*Injunctive
*Subjective
Behavior
Skills
Source: Fishbein & Yzer, 2003.
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  87
attitudes of others toward the women or the behavior of using family-planning
methods (for example, stigmatization or stereotypes), emotional state, other factors
such as perceived risk and susceptibility, and exposure to communication and other
messages (mass media, social network, and interpersonal) about the behavior.
Considering all these possibilities helped us create the questions and probes we
then used in our formative research studies.
When we applied this approach to the formative research for the family-
planning project, some of our theory-driven research found the following:
 To improve the likelihood of engaging in family-planning behaviors, first
we needed to look at what environmental constraints might be preventing the
women in our priority population from engaging in them, and then design
intervention strategies and tactics to help women overcome these constraints.
Women in our studies identified these constraints: only a few facilities
available in rural counties; busy clinic staff, making local outreach and pro-
motion efforts difficult; finding time in their busy schedules for setting clinic
appointments; and difficulties using the centralized referral service.
 We needed to assess whether the women had the necessary skills to access and
effectively use family-planning services and methods over time.
Here we found that not understanding the eligibility criteria (due to
confusing messaging and low literacy skills), nonadherence to birth control
methods over time (discontinuing pills or missing doses), and also reports of
broken condoms leading to unwanted pregnancies were the most common
problems reported by these women.
 When the women did not have strong intentions to perform the behavior, we
needed to look at changing (1) attitudes toward performing the behavior,
(2) perceived norms about performing the behavior, and (3) perceived self-
efficacy, or confidence in being able to perform the behavior.
Among the determinants of these intentions we found that conservative
community values played an important role in reducing conversations and
public education activities around family planning. We heard few comments
related to negative personal, peer, or social attitudes toward these women’s
personally using birth control. Indeed, there were generally favorable attitudes
about delaying pregnancy until a woman had graduated from school, had a
steady job and boyfriend, and was otherwise “ready” to raise a child. We did
88  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
not hear much about women believing that they were not susceptible to
becoming pregnant (though research by other investigators reported in the
literature informs us that this is the most common reason for women to
discontinue using contraceptives). There was also evidence that these women
did talk with each other about birth control, though no common times or
places for these conversations were discovered that might guide a commu-
nication strategy.
This example demonstrates how theory can guide research or inquiry into a
problem and ascertain how relevant the theoretical variables related to deter-
minants, context, and consequences are in real life. In this example, theory
gave my colleagues and me a set of hypotheses to test among the women who
participated in our focus groups. It did not lead us to conclusions that were
statistically reliable and generalizable to all women of that age, but that was not
our intention. Our intention was to develop insights into how to solve the
puzzle of increasing the number of women engaging in regular family-planning
behaviors. And given that objective, the results suggested a number of options
and opportunities. I will continue this story, but now through a different the-
oretical lens.
The Process of Behavior Change Framework
The process of behavior change framework (Piotrow, Kincaid, Rimon & Rinehart,
1997) proposes that people seeking or using family-planning and reproductive
health services move through a variety of intermediate steps, or stages, in the
behavior change process. These stages are
 Preknowledgeable: they are unaware of the problem or their personal risk.
 Knowledgeable: they are aware of the problem and understand what the
desired behaviors are (in this example, use of modern contraceptive methods).
 Approving: they are personally in favor of the desired behaviors.
 Intending: they personally express the desire to take the desired actions.
 Practicing: they are actively engaged in the desired behaviors (such as regularly
using contraceptive methods).
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  89
 Advocating: they are not only practicing the behaviors (such as family-
planning methods) but advocating them to others. Once people reach this
stage they become effective change agents among their peers and within their
social networks.
At a glance this model resembles the stages of change approach with its phases
of precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance in the
behavior change process (Prochaska & DiClemente, 1983). However, there is
one vital distinction: advocating. What Piotrow et al. (1997) found in their
research on improving family-planning practices in developing countries was that
women (and men) who became advocates for family planning were more likely to
sustain these practices than people who practiced but did not preach.
In the world of social media and technologies, the idea that social marketers
should be providing opportunities for people to pass along messages has become
common strategic advice (Lefebvre, 2007; Li & Bernoff, 2008). The insight from
the process of behavior change framework is that we should pay attention to the
advocacy stage and its related behaviors, especially in the context of family
planning. The importance of advocacy as a behavior maintenance strategy pro-
vides us with the theoretical grounding to think about and use social processes in
our social change activities—whether they are digitally mediated (through social
media and mobile technologies) or use other interpersonal channels. Indeed, the
empirically based benefit attached to the advocacy stage offers a rationale for using
social media to address family-planning issues.
Returning to the family-planning project, this model gave me and my col-
leagues a theoretical rationale for segmenting and prioritizing groups (or selecting
and concentrating on certain ones first). As we reviewed the framework, it was
clear that women in each of these stages would be thinking (or not) and acting (or
not) differently with respect to family-planning practices. Each group of women
would have different decisions and behaviors to engage in relevant to the stage
they were in. What became noteworthy to us was that advocacy behaviors within
a person’s social network could serve not just as a behavioral maintenance strategy
but as a recruitment and social media strategy as well. Our strategic insight was
generated by exploring the question of how we could work with users so that they
would become advocates for family planning through their social network sites
(such as Facebook and MySpace in this example), text messaging (SMS), and
other interpersonal networks. A substantial portion of our formative research with
users of family-planning methods (as opposed to the nonusers we had focused on
90  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
earlier) focused on discovering how appealing the idea of recruiting and sup-
porting others would be, as well as identifying the women’s vital behaviors in
maintaining long-term use of family-planning methods. We discovered that the
ideas had a lot of resonance with these women and led to many suggestions for
how they could do it and what tools and materials they would need, things that
subsequently found their way into the program implementation plan.
FROM INDIVIDUAL TO SYSTEM LEVELS OF ANALYSIS:
CHANGING SCALES OF REALITY
This chapter now switches its focus from the individual level of analysis of
determinants, context, and consequences of behavior to a further problem: the
analysis of these elements at a higher level of organization. This problem is
revealed in social ecological models (see figure 3.4) that identify behavioral
FIGURE 3.4 Multiple levels of influence on health behaviors
Individual/
population
health
Pathophysiological
pathways
Genetic factors
Individual risk factors
Environment
Life course
Social relationships
Living conditions
Neighborhoods and
communities
Institutions
Social and economic policies
Source: Gielen & Sleet, 2003.
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  91
determinants as ranging from genetic and physiological processes to neighbor-
hood and community conditions to social and economic policies. I start with
Duncan Watts, a physicist and sociologist, who presents two problems that
bedevil people faced with the challenges of large and complex puzzles. He
calls these the frame problem and the micro-macro problem (Watts, 2011). Both
of these problems highlight the need for social change programs to adopt theo-
retical perspectives that are broader than individual determinants. The frame
problem proposes that it is impossible to know all the potentially relevant facts
and determinants of a puzzle, given the overwhelming number of possibilities and
combinations of variables. Consequently, it is then difficult to focus selectively on
only certain ones and ignore the others; for example, to look at only psychological
determinants or to consider only solutions that employ persuasive communica-
tions. What the frame problem poses to social marketers is that we cannot know
for certain whether we have selected the right set of variables when we choose a
theory, or frame, to guide us in thinking about our puzzle.
The second problem Watts (2011) discusses is the micro-macro problem: one
that goes to the heart of the social marketing dilemma. This dilemma emanates from
our desire to achieve macro outcomes, ones that involve changes among large
numbers of people, among population segments, or in society as a whole. Yet these
outcomes are driven by the micro actions of individuals (for example, it is individuals
whose voting behavior determines the outcome of policy options, individuals’
behavior that sets the tone for an organizational culture, and individuals who connect
through social network sites to organize and plan social action). This problem is
embedded in definitions of social marketing as changing individual behaviors in
order to achieve social good. Although the intentions are commendable, the actual
process of moving from individual behavior change to changes at the societal level is
ignored, as if this transition will occur automatically—that it is simply a matter of
increasing the numbers of people practicing the behavior. As Watts (2011) notes,
how micro behaviors become macro solutions is a puzzle in search of an explanation
in many disciplines, and this puzzle cannot be simply dismissed or explained away as
inconsequential. Moreover, this process does not occur in a simple linear manner,
as is suggested by phrases such as “increasing the numbers.”
An analogy from biology helps to illustrate the problem. What if we were to
consider the entire span of human existence? How do atoms become molecules?
How do molecules form amino acids? How do amino acids and other chemicals
interact to create a living cell? How do some of these cells organize and specialize
92  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
to become the brain? And how does this brain develop consciousness and con-
template its eternal existence? The point Watts is making is that many disciplines
work with many different scales of reality and they are difficult to integrate. For
example, how can we explain consciousness by the chemical activity of a single
neuron? The short answer is that we do not. Instead, biologists and other scientists
invoke the idea of emergence to describe the shifting from one scale of reality to
the next, and use ideas such as complexity, interactions, and systems to consider
more than one scale at a time (an atomic scale versus a biochemical or physiological
one). To bring this problem back into the social marketing world, believing that
social change will happen “one person at a time” does not conform to what we know
about emergence in many other disciplines. It is analogous to believing that con-
sciousness can be explained by the action of a neuron or even many neurons; it may
be convenient to think like this, but throughout his book, Watts (2011) takes on
these logical fictions with data. Changes in complex social systems involve inter-
actions between people and systems, just as neurons must be connected and interact
with each other in systematic ways to create what we refer to as consciousness. This
means that social change programs need to consider more than one scale of reality at
a time, including scales relating to individuals, social networks, formal and informal
organizations, markets, and government regulations and policies. The remainder of
this chapter brings together some ways of thinking about these scales.
Behavioral Economics
Behavioral economics has captured the imagination of business leaders, policy-
makers, and the general public with the publication of several popular books
(Ariely, 2008; Kahneman, 2011; Levitt & Dubner, 2005; Thaler & Sunstein,
2008). Behavioral economics is particularly important to social marketers as it has
successfully unseated the model of the rational man (or rational person in the more
recent discussions)—the idea of the individual who consciously and deliberately
weighs pros and cons in making choices and acting in certain ways—that
underlies much economic and marketing thought (cf. Andreasen, 1995; Zaltman,
2003). Behavioral economics research, as well as work in related disciplines,
has now given primacy to the view that automatic (or unconscious) and social
reasons explain a large part of why people behave the way they do. The emerging
consensus is that in daily life the rational weighing of pros and cons for making
decisions and engaging in behaviors is the exception rather than the rule. This
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  93
shift in our understanding undermines the traditional notion of social marketing
as activities directed toward increasing pros, or benefits, and reducing cons, or
barriers, as described by Andreasen (1995), Kotler and Lee (2008), and
McKenzie-Mohr, Lee, Schultz, and Kotler (2012), among others.
The rational person model holds that people are motivated primarily by
material incentives and make decisions in a rational manner based on their
consideration and unbiased weighting of the benefits and costs of making certain
decisions or engaging in specific behaviors, ranging from what companies to
invest in to how much they will pay for branded versus unbranded soft drinks.
However, as Zaltman (2003, p. 9) notes, the recent empirical evidence also brings
into question an assumption that is an extension of the rational person model: the
assumption that people can readily explain their thinking and behavior (such as in
focus groups and in-depth interviews).
Lefebvre and Kotler (2011) discuss a number of concepts from the behavioral
economics literature that are useful for social marketing program planners to
consider (see table 3.4). The primary idea is that people use heuristics, or
approximate rules of thumb, rather than strictly rational analyses to make most
decisions. For instance, the use of the 4Ps for planning programs is an example of
a heuristic—marketers of all types have found that using this four-element
heuristic leads to better program outcomes than approaches based on using only
communication strategies or on just adjusting prices or distribution. A second
idea is that the way a problem is presented (or framed) to a decision maker will
affect his or her action. Although this idea is not newsworthy to people familiar
with the tactics of media advocacy or political communication (Lakoff, 2004;
Wallack, 1990), it further weakens the notion that people are always making
rational judgments about how to go about their daily lives, let alone using rational
processes to make far-reaching public policy decisions (cf. Stone, 1997). A third
category of behavioral economics relates to market inefficiencies—specifically,
how markets fail to evolve to a theoretical state of equilibrium where buyers and
sellers and also price and costs are balanced. Rather, many market outcomes of
particular concern to social change agents are often contrary to rational expec-
tations, such as inequities in health status and social justice, insufficient supplies
of condoms, and concentrations of health services among the wealthier areas of a
community or in the urban areas of a country.
There has been little published work explicitly incorporating behavioral eco-
nomics principles into social marketing programs. However, many projects now
94  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
TABLE 3.4 Concepts and questions posed by behavioral economics
Loss aversion People are more averse to losing things than they are inclined
toward gaining things. Why should someone give something up in
order to experience new (and uncertain) benefits? How do we make
these benefits tangible and immediate?
Status quo bias People are most likely to choose to do things that require the least
amount of effort. The best predictor of future behavior is current
behavior. Why should people or organizations change if what they
are currently doing is still working for them? How do we help people
to become uncomfortable or dissatisfied with their current
condition?
Dual self People do not have a consistent “personality”; instead their
behavior is largely contingent on the circumstances they find
themselves in. Why should we expect people to act consistently?
How do we help people apply what they learn in one situation
(for example, sexual negotiation skills practiced in a clinic) to
another situation (such as being with another person in a bar
or a car)?
Attention constraints People get distracted, often despite their best intentions. Why do
people lose attention over time and in many different situations,
such as saving regularly for retirement or adhering to treatment
regimens? How do we remind them or cue the appropriate
behaviors to regain their attention?
Defaults People make passive choices based on how the choices are
presented to them. Why are certain choices presented to people in
the way they are now? How can we redesign these choices (a
process also known as choice architecture) to make the more
beneficial ones for the person or society the easier ones (that is, how
can we engage people in signing up for retirement plans, becoming
an organ donor, or choosing privacy settings on social network
sites)?
Resource slack When planning into the future, people realistically assume resources
will be tight but expect time to magically materialize. Why do
people (including program planners, I will add) overlook the time it
will take to adopt or sustain new behaviors? How can we create
opportunities for people to test their assumptions about the time it
will take to do and maintain certain behaviors?
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  95
being done within a behavioral economics framework are relevant to social mar-
keting literature and practice. In the next section, on MINDSPACE, there are
several examples where the overlap between the two approaches is evident. I leave
this section with one very important example of how behavioral economics findings
and social marketing can be combined in improving economic decision making
among the poor.
Bertrand, Mullainathan, and Shafir (2006) note that the poor have much nar-
rower margins for error in making economic decisions than more affluent people do.
In their analysis, these authors propose that behavioral economics and social mar-
keting principles should be combined in programs to improve economic decision
making among the poor and thus reduce their chance of experiencing potentially
calamitous outcomes. Bertrand et al. suggest that such integrated programs might
1. Improve the ease of access to products, services, and information whose
availability is too often taken for granted by policymakers and program plan-
ners (a process these authors label “creating the right channel factors”).
2. Develop messages and programs that appeal to the right identity, recognizing
that people may in effect have multiple selves because they think about them-
selves in different ways in different situations, such as identifying and interacting
with others in various social groups.
3. Create opportunities to improve people’s ability to process information when it
offers too many choices or is complex. Bertrand et al. note that when behavioral
recommendations are presented to people in small groups they are more likely to
adopt them because the group interaction allows social norms to be addressed
as well.
4. Incorporate time management and planning into change programs to address
the resource slack bias many people bring to these challenges (the “I’ll do it
later when I have more time” objection).
5. Focus on the nuances of policy and program design, including having clear
incentives that are offered in the right context; offering natural and desirable
defaults and not too many options; framing options as gains or losses and as
injunctive or popular norms; selecting the right format for communication to
enhance its persuasiveness; and appealing to people’s right identity, the one
likely to adopt the program purpose or behavior.
96  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
MINDSPACE
Behavioral economics has achieved a high level of visibility in the United
Kingdom owing to the creation of the Behavioral Insights Team in the Cabinet
Office. This unit (also known as the “nudge unit”) supports a philosophical shift
in the UK government from relying on laws and regulations to manage behavior
to using market incentives. Its origins lie in a series of interviews conducted with
senior civil servants, academics, and behavior change experts to identify the key
behavioral drivers that could be influenced by the development of specific policy
proposals in areas such as crime, obesity, and environmental sustainability. The
result of this work was a checklist for policymakers (see table 3.5), identified by
the acronym MINDSPACE (Dolan, Hallsworth, Halpern, King & Vlaev, 2010).
MINDSPACE incorporates some ideas from theories this chapter has already
reviewed and other ideas drawn from the behavioral economics literature (notably
ideas about incentives, defaults, and priming).
Dolan et al. (2010) suggest that the MINDSPACE model can help policy-
makers understand how to improve current efforts to change behaviors through
the use of incentives. The model also highlights what types of information are
most important to people and how that information should be presented to them.
MINDSPACE reminds change agents to use social norms and commitment
strategies, and how to recognize when their programs may lead to inadvertent
consequences (for example, if they develop programs with messengers who are
not trusted by the priority audiences and whose messages go against widely shared
popular beliefs). While arguments can be made for the inclusion of other
TABLE 3.5 The MINDSPACE checklist
Messenger We are heavily influenced by who communicates with us.
Incentives Our responses to incentives are shaped by predictable mental shortcuts, such
as strongly avoiding losses.
Norms We are strongly influenced by what other people do.
Defaults We tend to “go with the flow” of preset options.
Salience Our attention is drawn to what is novel and seems relevant for us.
Priming Our actions are often influenced by subconscious clues.
Affect Our emotional associations can powerfully shape our actions.
Commitment We seek to be consistent with our public promises, and reciprocate acts.
Ego We act in ways that make us feel better about ourselves.
Source: Dolan et al., 2010.
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  97
behavior change constructs in this model, it shows a useful parsimony, especially
given the people for whom it is designed, in offering major ideas from a variety of
disciplines in a compact form.
The implications of MINDSPACE for health programs were elaborated on in
the report Applying Behavioural Insight to Health (Cabinet Office, Behavioural
Insight Team, 2010), which described a number of initiatives, including these:
 Using commitment and incentives to have smokers sign a contract under
which they lose or keep rewards based on whether they pass regular tests to
demonstrate that they remain abstinent.
 Implementing prompted choice at motor vehicle registration centers to
encourage people to become organ donors when applying for a driving license.
 Increasing the salience of social norms about alcohol consumption in order to
reduce alcohol use on university campuses.
 Developing a reciprocal time-credit program (CareBank) to encourage more
voluntary activity that supports older citizens in the community.
While there are as yet few data on the effectiveness of these and other initiatives
stimulated by the MINDSPACE model, it offers social marketers a working model
of how to present alternative scenarios for behavior and social change programs to
policymakers. The categories the MINDSPACE acronym represents can also be
useful for program designers who wish to incorporate principles of behavior change
from behavioral economics and communication theory into their work.
Diffusion of Innovations
In a review of the most popular theories and models being used in social marketing
programs a decade ago (Lefebvre, 2001), I found that the diffusion of innovations
theory offered one of the most robust theories for taking innovations in ideas,
behaviors, and practice to scale. Though the calls for scaling up successful behavioral
interventions for such things as HIV prevention, chronic disease prevention,
and tuberculosis control are reverberating around the globe, there has been little
discussion or application of the ways in which social marketing might respond to
these challenges (cf. Elzinga, Raviglione & Maher, 2004; Gaziano, Galea & Reddy,
2007; Global HIV Prevention Working Group, 2007). As Dees, Anderson, and
Wei-Skillern (2004) have said: “If we are serious about tackling social problems on a
98  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
large scale, we need to develop more effective tools to address this challenge” (p. 26).
Scaling of behavior change interventions—for example, trying to scale up intensive,
clinic-based, behavioral counseling sessions to a community or countrywide effort—
may be one of the most formidable micro-macro problems our society faces.
Social marketing needs to focus on pushing the curve of adoption of health
practices among individuals, the adoption of effective interventions among
THE NEED TO SCALE UP HIV INTERVENTIONS
In 2007, the Global HIV Prevention Working Group laid out the facts about what
is known about preventing HIV infections and also the facts about what is
actually happening. The challenges are stark.
 Condoms. Only 9 percent of risky sex acts worldwide involve the use of a con-
dom, and the global supply of condoms is millions short of what is needed.
 HIV testing. In the most heavily affected countries of sub-Saharan Africa,
only 12 percent of men and 10 percent of women know their HIV status.
 Treatment for sexually transmitted infections. It is estimated that fewer than
20 percent of people with a sexually transmitted infection are able to
obtain treatment, even though untreated STIs increase the risk of HIV
acquisition and transmission by several orders of magnitude.
 Prevention of mother-to-child transmission. Years after clinical trials dem-
onstrated that a brief, inexpensive antiretroviral regimen could reduce the
risk of mother-to-child HIV transmission by 50 percent, only 11 percent of
HIV-infected pregnant women in low- and middle-income countries receive
antiretroviral prophylaxis.
 Prevention for vulnerable populations. Prevention services reach only 9 per-
cent of men who have sex with men, 8 percent of injection drug users, and
under 20 percent of sex workers.
 Prevention in health care settings. An estimated six million units of
unscreened blood are transfused yearly in developing countries, and
40 percent of injections administered in health care settings are unsafe.
Source: Adapted from Global HIV Prevention Working Group, 2007.
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  99
practitioners, and the adoption of health-promoting and supportive policies
among policymakers. It can become a powerful tool for scaling up programs if we
think about that challenge as not getting bigger numbers but developing methods
to expand impacts from small studies to larger social systems—that is, to bridge
the micro-macro gap. We need to adopt a variety of scales of reality to make this
micro-macro shift in problem solving. Adopting diffusion of innovations theory
helps us understand how and why groups of people adopt (or fail to adopt)
healthier, environmentally conscious, or socially beneficial behaviors. These
reasons include, in addition to the variables identified in table 3.1, (1) the
contextual factors that surround the adoption of new practices and policies,
(2) people’s perception of an innovation as a normative behavior among their
reference group or peers (which studies suggest accounts for 50 to 86 percent of
the variance in the rate of diffusion of new behaviors), and (3) a risk-benefit
analysis that accepts certainty of outcomes and familiarity with the new behavior
over the costs and benefits of changing current behavior (Rogers, 1995).
In addition to understanding the variables surrounding products, services, and
practices that are more likely to be broadly adopted, marketing for behavior
and social change at scale also needs to explore segments of priority groups who
may help to speed or to impede broad adoption. The categories used to segment
people by how likely they are to adopt innovations of many different types include
Innovators: people who have a high tolerance of risk; are fascinated with novelty;
are usually viewed by others in their community as mavericks, not opinion
leaders; and whose social networks transcend geographical boundaries.
Early adopters: people who are the community opinion leaders and well
connected socially and locally, have the resources and risk tolerance to try
new things, and are watched by others—and they know it.
Early majority: people who are very engaged in local peer networks, rely on
personal familiarity before adoption, and continually ask, How does this
new behavior [or product or service] help me?
Late majority: people who are most sensitive to peer pressure and norms, yet
very cautious about change of any kind; and who seek to minimize
uncertainty of outcomes and want to see the proof of relative advantage
locally—not read about it on websites or see it on television.
100  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
Traditionalists: people who believe in the tried and true; who are near isolates
in their social networks, which explains why they can be so difficult to
reach and influence; who are often suspicious of innovation and change
agents; and who are seeking assurances that adoption of new behaviors
(such as stopping smoking or driving a low carbon emission vehicle) will
not fail.
One area for applying diffusion models in social marketing that should not be
overlooked is in meeting social goals for increasing the use of evidence-based
practices in such areas as education, housing, public health, and medicine (Elias,
Zins, Graczyk & Weissberg, 2003; Gaziano et al., 2007; Harris et al., 2012).
Maibach, Van Duyn, and Bloodgood (2006) suggest three social marketing
approaches for increasing the adoption of evidence-based practices: (1) conduct
consumer research with prospective adopters to identify their perspectives on how
evidence-based prevention programs can advance their organization’s mission,
(2) build sustainable distribution channels to promote and deliver evidence-
based programs to prospective adopters, and (3) improve access to easily imple-
mented programs that are consistent with evidence-based guidelines. To these
suggested approaches I would add three more: (4) conduct segmentation studies
with organizations that can be arrayed along a traditionalist-innovator continuum,
(5) generate pricing studies that address relative advantage as well as the goodness
of fit of new practices to existing organizational processes and work flow, and
(6) develop service models that allow customization and adaptation of evidence-
based practices without sacrificing effectiveness, equity of effects, and impact.
However, it is also true that many constraints to scaling up exist (Dandona
et al., 2008; Global HIV Prevention Working Group, 2007; Hanson, Ranson,
Oliveira & Mills, 2003; Rogers, 1995; also see the accompanying list of challenges).
There are also people who caution against a pro-innovation bias—which occurs
when diffusion agents are so supportive of the innovation they are promoting that
they overlook or ignore data contrary to its reputed effectiveness—and these
arguments must be considered and not treated simply as the expected cries of
traditionalists.
There are lessons social marketers have learned that can be used when
designing social marketing strategy to promote diffusion of products and services
as well as adoption of new behaviors.
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  101
1. Find sound innovations and solutions, ones that meet the criteria noted
earlier and are relevant to people’s everyday lives.
2. Provide opportunities for innovators to discover innovations and solutions.
3. Engage the curiosity of the early adopters who must first test and validate the
innovation.
4. Target the weak ties between innovators and early adopters through iden-
tifying the boundary spanners who interact with multiple networks. These
boundary spanners are critical agents for introducing new ideas into com-
munities (whether these communities are geographical, professional, virtual,
and so forth).
5. Promote the work of early adopters, especially among the early majority.
Successfully traversing the gap between these two segments is the critical
distinction between innovations and practices that go in and out of fashion
quickly on the one hand and those that are embraced and sustained by a
majority of a population on the other hand.
CHALLENGES IN SCALING UP SOCIAL INNOVATIONS
 Lack of demand
 Potential for stigma or discrimination
 Lack of trained personnel
 Inadequate financial resources to meet changing demand
 Incompatibility with existing structures or work flow
 Misallocation of resources due to poor information and monitoring systems
 Potential undesirable, indirect, and unanticipated consequences of adoption
 Nonsupportive policies at the organizational or government levels
 Weak or fragmented product and service delivery systems
 Need for collective action
102  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
6. Create spannable social distances between groups through various means,
including using social media such as social network sites and blogs and
convening meetings of the unlike, rather than the usual host of agents.
7. Enhance the salience and attractiveness of the positive deviants—the people
who are already practicing the target behavior or using the product and
service; put the practitioners of new desired behaviors in contexts and
situations that attract imitation or modeling.
8. If you can’t imitate them, don’t copy them. Expect and encourage reinvention.
9. Support time and energy for discovery, testing, networking, adapting,
monitoring, and also preserving the past. Do not write off the traditionalists,
especially when encouraging organizational change.
10. It starts with you and your partners.
With respect to this last point, research has found that highly linked and
centralized coalitions are less likely to adopt new evidence-based public health
programs for drug-abuse prevention in schools than are ones that are less dense
and have more decentralized structures (Valente, Chou & Pentz, 2007). This
finding goes against the commonsense idea that the better developed and tightly
knit coalitions will be more efficient and productive in their work. Yet a moment
of reflection with these data, and we can quickly come up with reasons why more
tightly linked groups may resist new ways of doing things that upset their care-
fully crafted status quo. The people who are important for adopting new practices
and programs are the boundary spanners, individuals who are not tightly bound to
a social clique (or usual cast of characters), to a shared worldview, or to groupthink
or the standard operating procedures in their organization. These are the people
more likely to be open to innovation; the traditionalists often have their own,
seemingly immutable point of view. And bound together they become even more
strongly set against change—even when the data suggest they should and could be
more effective in meeting their objectives. Irrationality is not confined to indivi-
duals; marketers should understand that when working toward scalable change.
Design Thinking
Design is often thought of as the tasks associated with creating posters, print
materials, and websites. Other people think of design aesthetically and in
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  103
association with what they see in fashion magazines, home decorating catalogues,
high-end department stores, and various technology products (Apple’s products
being a prime example). Less obvious might be the application of design principles
(cf. Lidwell, Holder & Butler, 2003) in such areas as creating systemic change in
the National Health Service, developing approaches to patient-centered health
care, and developing campaigns to modify eating patterns (Lefebvre & Kotler,
2011). Tim Brown (2008) describes these efforts as design thinking: “a human-
centered design ethos . . . [by which] innovation is powered by a thorough
understanding, through direct observation, of what people want and need in their
lives and what they like or dislike about the way particular products are made,
packaged, marketed, sold, and supported” (p. 86). If we extend this definition to
include the services and behavioral alternatives that are offered to people to facil-
itate improvements in their lives, design thinking offers a number of ideas and
practices that can complement, and deepen, the approach social change agents take
in their work.
Design thinking involves more than making products pretty and appealing; it
means developing ideas that are desirable to people, technically feasible, and
viable for the organization to do (Brown, 2008). Designers apply the design
process to practical, creative resolution of problems or issues that might lead to a
new or improved product or service, new processes or experiences for consumers
or users, or new social and organizational systems. Businesses are incorporating
design thinking as a way to stimulate more innovation in the products and ser-
vices they offer. And as Brown and Wyatt (2010) note, many nonprofit orga-
nizations are also adopting design thinking for developing social innovations in
the face of chronic, ongoing social problems. Roger Martin (2009), dean of the
Rotman School of Management at the University of Toronto, views design
thinking as leading a movement that looks at such wicked problems, or social
mysteries, as how to make health care systems work or why some cities seem to
function better than others, in order to come up with new heuristics or guidelines
for an organized exploration of the possibilities.
Design thinking shares a similar value with social marketing in being driven
by a people-centered perspective. Indeed, designers are among the most vocal
advocates for involving the people we formerly called our audience in the process—
not just participating in it but being co-creators of and tactics. Designers strive
to develop an empathy for the people they wish to serve—to understand their lives
beyond the numbers from surveys or the comments from focus groups. They
104  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
employ a number of research techniques to establish this empathy and to gain
insight into ways to frame and solve problems from these people’s point of view (a
topic this book will explore in chapters 5 and 6). The value of design research is
judged by its “world-changing” impact on the designers, or social marketers, in
terms of inspiring them and in the results that follow (cf. Laurel, 2003a).
WHAT IS DESIGN THINKING?
Victor Lombardi (2005) describes the design thinking process as
 Collaborative—especially in working with others having different and
complementary experiences in order to generate better work and achieve
agreement
 Abductive—inventing new options to find new and better solutions to new
problems
 Experimental—building prototypes and posing hypotheses, testing them,
and iterating this activity to find what works and what doesn’t work to
manage risk
 Personal—considering the unique context of each problem and the people
involved
 Integrative—perceiving an entire system and its linkages
 Interpretive—devising how to frame the problem and judge the possible
solutions
The design approach embraces the ideals of transdisciplinary approaches
(in which we jump out of our silos) to problem definition and solution; stops to
value and appreciate what might be before jumping into the process; sees
experimentation as a never-ending process of prototyping, with the motto
“learn fast” (not as conducting fully formed experiments with rigid protocols
and high resource costs); is sensitive to the context of problems (and does not
bring a cookie-cutter approach to the issue); looks at problems as occurring in
systems (not as due simply to individual determinants and consequences); and
explores how different frames, or points of view, change the way a problem can
be perceived and addressed.
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  105
Service Design
The related field of service design has grown out of the design discipline and
incorporates many of the same principles (Lunenfeld, 2003). Service designers
apply design principles to services of all kinds, from community-based approaches
to crime prevention to hotel experiences. One definition of services in this
approach is “time-based processes that consist of sequences of operations targeted
to deliver a solution to the customer’s problems and needs” (Koivisto, 2009,
p. 137). Disentangling these processes from a user’s point of view is the core of
the approach. That means having a thorough understanding of service touch-
points (when and where a service reaches, or affects, people) and of how these
points are connected together over time to form the customer journey, and then
redesigning and reengineering the process, not for the ease and convenience of
providers but to make it more suitable for people who choose to use the service.
When we consider all the services that make up social marketers’ efforts to
improve society—tobacco cessation efforts, breast-feeding programs, health ser-
vices, consultations to reduce energy or water consumption in homes or busi-
nesses, and consumer information systems, to name a handful—the work we do to
integrate the marketing of socially beneficial services with service design principles
is one of the more fertile areas for research and practice.
I have briefly introduced design thinking and service design ideas and ele-
ments here because they are incorporated throughout this book. To close the
present discussion, table 3.6 presents definitions of service design terms that will
be useful in later chapters.
Social Networks
With many social marketers having gained experience in using a variety of the-
ories and models that focus on individuals and their behaviors, there has been a
growing recognition that social theories of behavior change are needed to address
some of the more compelling puzzles of our time. For instance, Dholakia and
Dholakia (2001) noted that many organizations that use social marketing ignore
the fundamental processes of social control and social change. These authors
called for social marketing to be integrated with the broad scope of social change
theories, techniques, and practices. From a practical standpoint, the research
demonstrating how HIV/AIDS, tobacco use, loneliness, and obesity spread
106  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
through social networks (Adimora, Schoenbach & Doherty, 2007; Cacioppo,
Fowler & Christakis, 2009; Christakis & Fowler, 2007, 2008; Epstein, 2007;
Helleringer & Kohler, 2007; Mah & Halperin, 2008) presents us with an urgent
need to reconsider our frameworks.
The role of social networks in disease transmission and network effects on the
prevalence of risk behaviors challenge us to focus on social units of analysis, change,
and outcome. For example, concurrent sexual partnerships, that is, having two or
more stable sexual partners over time, is now seen as a previously hidden driver of
the HIV epidemic (Epstein, 2007). Concurrency, especially when the partners are
sexually active with others in a small social network such as is found in villages and
towns, heightens the risk of HIV transmission because these relationships are not
casual or one-off sexual encounters. Instead, these multiple relationships are
maintained over time and a level of trust can develop that diminishes their per-
ceived riskiness. Thus when one partner becomes infected, he or she is highly likely
to have unprotected sex with one or more other partners during the window of
TABLE 3.6 Service design terms and definitions
Service design The process of addressing how useful, usable, and desirable service
interfaces are from the client’s point of view and how effective,
efficient, and distinctive they are from the supplier’s point of view. It is
used both to restructure existing services and to develop new ones.
Service ecology The system in which a service is embedded. The system may include
politics, the economy, client demand and needs, employees, law,
societal trends, and technology developments. Understanding and
analyzing service ecologies can reveal opportunities for new actors,
new relationships among existing actors, and the development of
sustainable new services.
Customer journey The customer’s perception and experience of the complete service
interface over time. Determining when and where the journey begins
and ends is a first step in developing a complete picture of this process.
Service touchpoints The tangible manifestations of the service, including the spaces,
objects, people, and interactions that make up the entire experience or
journey. Touchpoints can take many forms, including advertising and
direct solicitations; web, mobile, and PC interfaces; physical spaces such
as waiting rooms and examination areas; call service representatives or
counselors; and print and audiovisual materials.
Source: Adapted from Miettinen, 2009.
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  107
greatest HIV infectivity and before he or she is diagnosed as having HIV.
Developing interventions to address the network effects of sexual activity are only
just beginning. Similarly, the work of Christakis and Fowler (2007, 2008) provides
evidence that the likelihood of becoming obese rises as close members in one’s
social network become overweight and obese and that the likelihood of stopping
smoking is highly susceptible to the smoking status of others in one’s network. It is
clear that trying to alter individual determinants of these conditions in any type of
risk reduction program is too narrow a focus.
Coincident with the increasing recognition of the role of social networks in
various public health puzzles, the scientific study of social networks has also
grown (cf. Goyal, 2007; Valente, 2010; Watts, 2011), as have the efforts by
commercial marketing, public health, and nonprofit organizations to make use of
strategies that tap into social networks (cf. Abroms, Schiavo & Lefebvre, 2008;
Li & Bernoff, 2008; Waters, Burnett, Lamm & Lucas, 2009). The field of social
marketing has been slow to respond to this shift in perspective. Donovan and
Henley (2010) have been leaders in calling for social marketing to incorporate
concepts such as social determinants, social capital, social ecology, and advocacy
into the planning, implementation, and evaluation of programs. Yet when these
authors offer theoretical models for social marketing, they fall back upon ones
that focus only on individual behavior change.
Glenane-Antoniadis, Whitwell, Bell, and Menguc (2003) may have been
among the first to bring social concepts into the social marketing literature. They
view the idea of social capital as offering a bridge and focal point for social
marketers who want to influence social determinants through the application of
social diffusion and social networks theory. Putnam’s identification of the ele-
ments that constitute social capital is commonly accepted (Putnam, 2000):
 Community networks
 Civic engagement (participation in these community networks)
 Local identity and a sense of solidarity and equality with other community
members
 Norms of trust and reciprocal help and support
For social change agents, building community engagement, strengthening
social networks and local solidarity, and enhancing norms of trust and support in
108  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
villages, neighborhoods, and communities are valued processes and outcomes.
However, for many traditional social marketers, social capital seems too far
removed from individual behavior changes to benefit society. I suggest that the
role of social capital depends on the behaviors one is trying to change. For
example, Kotler & Lee (2009) set out to provide a social marketing “toolkit” for
policymakers, entrepreneurs, and governments to use in efforts to alleviate pov-
erty. Yet the toolkit focused only on using social marketing methods to influence
individual behaviors that affect health, safety, the food supply, financial man-
agement, and gender equality. While there was some recognition that poverty is
linked to more than unwise individual behaviors, this attempt to address a
complex puzzle was limited by its inability to move beyond the individual frame
of reference. This approach portrays the issue I started the chapter with: if your
theory leads you to ask the wrong questions, you will not come up with improved
solutions.
In looking at health disparities—just one part of the poverty puzzle—Wallack
(2000) notes that the existence of such disparities is more than a problem of
people who are poor having fewer positive health behaviors than more affluent
people. Rather, it is a puzzle in which the research demonstrates that social capital
plays a crucial role. Wallack presents a review of the research linking social capital
to health and the pathways through which low social capital may contribute to
poor health status and health disparities. These pathways include (1) systematic
underinvestments in health and social infrastructure; (2) inhibition of the flow of,
and access to, health information (remember the discussion of the health infor-
mation marketplace in the last chapter); (3) an increase in individuals’ sense of
isolation; and (4) lowered individual (and collective) efficacy. In proposing how
we might develop interventions to increase social capital, he suggests these
questions for us to consider when selecting strategies:
 Does the approach increase the capacity of individuals or small groups
to participate in collective action by
 providing participatory skills, and
 creating a structure or network through which individuals, groups
and organizations can act?
 Does the approach connect the problems or issues to broader social
forces?
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  109
 Does the approach increase the community’s capacity to collaborate
and cooperate by strengthening existing groups (create bonding
capital) and connecting various groups (create bridging capital)?
 Does the approach reflect a social justice orientation—the idea that
“each member of the community owes something to all the rest, and
the community owes something to each of its members”? (Etzioni,
1993, p. 263) [Wallack, 2000, pp. 358–359].
These are certainly much different objectives than reducing people’s tobacco
use, increasing physical activity levels, having more women using family-planning
methods, or having more recycling in neighborhoods. But there is also nothing
(except theoretical blinders) standing in the way of approaching tobacco use,
obesity, unwanted pregnancies, or more sustainable environments through pro-
grams with ideas of social capital and social networks embedded in them. Whether
these “social” approaches will lead to more effective, equitable, and sustainable
solutions to these puzzles than “individual” approaches awaits empirical tests.
Moving from the more abstract idea of social capital back to the social net-
works that constitute that capital, we know that people learn about and choose
among behavioral options not only by directly observing others in their social
circle and the consequences they experience but also indirectly when their friends
and associates connect with people outside that proximal network and then bring
additional information or practices back to the network. In reviewing the
research, Goyal (2007) concluded that variations in behaviors among individuals
are related not only to the connections people have within the same social group
but also to their being members of different groups as well. The implication of
this work for social marketers seems clear: people with whom the priority group
members associate, or are otherwise connected to, must be considered and addressed
by intervention efforts. These social network intervention strategies include
Focusing on people who have a high degree of connectedness within a
network (who might be called connectors, influentials, or opinion leaders)
to spread information and model behaviors for others in the network
Reducing the density of a network in which risk behaviors are concentrated
by introducing more boundary spanners or by increasing network
members’ connections with groups outside their immediate network
110  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
Identifying which members of a network are most attentive and responsive to
the behaviors of others and then enhancing the salience and attractiveness
of out-group members (the positive deviants) by positioning these prac-
titioners of desired behaviors in a light that attracts imitation or modeling
SOCIAL STRATEGIES FOR SOCIAL MARKETING
In discussing the emergence and impact of social and mobile technologies,
Lefebvre (2007) noted five implications of adopting a social networking per-
spective on social marketing practice. They are adapted here as questions to
guide the embedding of social theories into social marketing programs:
 Do we enhance linkages among people, organizations, and communities to
allow them to access, exchange, utilize, and leverage each other’s knowl-
edge and resources to co-create value with each other?
 Are we developing, nurturing, and sustaining new linkages among like-
minded people, organizations, and communities to address common
puzzles and achieve positive health and social change?
 How are we identifying, encouraging, and enabling the many different
types of indigenous helpers who are found in social networks and com-
munities, so that they can be more effective in promoting positive health,
environmental, and social behaviors and policies?
 What do we need to do better to engage communities in monitoring,
problem analysis, and problem solving; striving for health and social equity;
and increasing social capital?
 How do we go about weaving together existing social networks of indivi-
duals, organizations, and communities to create new sources of power and
inspiration to address health and social issues?
These questions provide a useful measure of whether your social marketing
program is stuck in the myopia of individual change theories. The key test
comes with these questions: How does a networked view of the world disrupt
our usual ways of thinking about and engaging with the people, organizations,
and communities with which we usually work? What are the insights we can
gain from this perspective?
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  111
Building Communities
For many years communities were inextricably linked with social marketing.
Lefebvre and Flora (1988) laid out the defining features of the social marketing
approach in public health based on experiences they shared directing community
interventions aimed at reducing cardiovascular diseases. Yet there has been a
marked separation between social marketers and community change agents ever
since, with many social marketing programs becoming not much more than mass
media education and communication campaigns. Social marketing in these con-
texts became a shorthand term designating “new” health communication cam-
paigns that segmented their audience, pretested materials, focused on changing
behaviors and not just knowledge and attitudes, and considered the 4Ps in the
context of communication planning (that is, in the messages of the campaign, the
format of the communication products, the “prices” people would pay to change
behaviors, the barriers to changing behavior, and the distribution of the com-
munication products). In contrast, community development and mobilization
projects rejected any mention of segmentation, formative research, or distribution
and price (cf. McKee, 1992).
Differences in the practice of social marketing became even more pronounced
in developing countries, where social marketing became synonymous with the
marketing of products for family planning, maternal and child health, HIV
prevention, and malaria control, while other development organizations formed
themselves around concepts such as behavior change communication, develop-
ment communication, and community mobilization. Responding to this frac-
turing of resources and talent, McKee (1992) presented an approach intended to
bridge the unnecessary gulfs that had opened between advocates of social mar-
keting and advocates of social mobilization with a model that blended the
strengths of each: marketing research methods, alliance building, and advocacy.
Few practitioners seem to have or heeded his call.
An effort to bring social marketing to communities that were struggling to
address environmental puzzles was called community-based social marketing
(CBSM) (McKenzie-Mohr, 2000). McKenzie-Mohr and Smith (1999, p. 3)
described CBSM as a process of identifying the barriers to and benefits of
engaging in behaviors, and then organizing the public into groups with shared
characteristics in order to more efficiently deliver programs. Bryant et al. (2000)
112  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
used the term community-based prevention marketing to refer to public health
programs that combined community participation methods with social marketing
approaches. Chapter 11 presents a fuller discussion of these two approaches.
The community-based approach as a context for implementing social mar-
keting programs has much to commend it. It can result in
 Gaining community insight into problems and community support for
proposed solutions
 Ensuring the use of indigenous knowledge and expertise
 Mobilizing and employing local communication channels, including local
mass media and local social and interpersonal communication networks
 Localizing distribution of products and services, and improving access and
opportunities to engage in new behaviors
 Building more sustainable solutions
Engaging the community is not without its drawbacks. McKee (1992) notes
that “community participation” can range from full engagement of the com-
munity in a dialogue about problems and solutions to a cursory consultation
consisting of interviewing a few leaders or conducting community focus groups.
Participation from the community can result in the development of a partici-
pating elite, who may, or may not, represent broader community viewpoints.
Program planners can fail to recognize the opportunity costs that will be
incurred by people who participate in the development and oversight of the
program and that may limit participation. Open participation can also lead
to manipulation and conflict by and among different stakeholders. And local
agendas may not match those of the donor or lead agency. Finally, there is a
need for partnership development and advocacy to gain strong public and
political commitment and create a culture in which to embed and support
social goals.
One other perspective on communities that requires more appreciation in the
social marketing approach is the asset-based model. Kretzmann and McKnight
(1993) list several arguments against relying on needs assessments and the
mapping of deficits in community projects:
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  113
 Taking this approach results in a nearly endless list of problems and needs,
and that leads to a fragmentation of efforts to provide solutions.
 Using the results of a needs assessment to target resources directs funding to
service providers rather than residents, a consequence not always either
planned for or effective.
 Making resources available on the basis of a needs assessment can have
negative effects on the nature of local community leadership by forcing
communities to highlight their problems and deficiencies and ignore their
capacities and strengths.
 Providing resources on the basis of a needs assessment underlines the per-
ception that only outside experts can provide real help.
Kretzmann and McKnight (1993) argue that a needs-based strategy will
inevitably focus on community survival rather than supporting a shift to serious
change or community development. An alternative approach they propose is
asset-based community development, which has three interrelated characteristics:
 The strategy starts with the capacities of community residents and workers
and the assets that local organizations and associations possess, not with what
is absent or problematic or what the community needs.
 The focus is on the agenda-building and problem-solving capacities of local
residents, associations, and institutions to stress the primacy of local direction,
investment, creativity, and ownership.
 Implementation of the strategy will be driven by the challenge to constantly
build and rebuild the relationships between and among local residents, local
associations, and local institutions.
The asset-based model is intended to reinforce the need for social mar-
keters, particularly those who work in resource-constrained contexts and with
disadvantaged populations, to view their work in communities as needing to
expand to working with communities. It also, ideally, awakens the idea that
decisions and strategies based on needs and barriers may be inferior approaches
to program development. Community strengths and competencies should
receive at least equal attention in marketing plans. Indeed, one of the potential
114  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
unintended effects of well-done community-based programs could be that they
result in lowered levels of social capital and self- and collective efficacy, and
increased dependency on experts among citizens. An asset-based approach also
reinforces two core values of the social marketing approach: a person- or
community-centered orientation and a commitment to engaging people in the
process, rather than treating them as only passive consumers of messages and
programs.
SHIFTING FROM INDIVIDUALS TO MARKETS
Shifting from a focus on individuals as the exclusive unit of analysis and inter-
vention to a focus that includes markets is a radical idea for many people. It does
elicit almost primal fears that “the market”—which many equate with ruthless
corporate barons and financial masters of the universe—will be the determinant
of how people live and whether they will do so safely. As we witnessed in the years
following 2008, left to its own devices the financial marketplace could lead whole
nations to diminished health, safety, and massive degradation of the environ-
ment. Social marketers need to become more engaged in shaping markets rather
than just accepting the consequences for their activities (cf. Hastings, 2012). The
shift from an exclusive focus on individuals to one that includes markets is a
micro to macro shift that parallels the shift in public health from considerations of
individual determinants of health and behavior change to a social ecological
perspective (Marmot, 2005; Sallis, Owen & Fisher, 2008). It defines an emergent
moment (cf. Watts, 2011) in which connectedness, systems, and the complexity
of the marketplace begin to supersede the individual level of analysis.
Markets and their place in society constitute a key issue that most social
marketers have simply ignored, despite their intention of using marketing to
improve society in some way. Wilkie and Moore (2003) describe the aggregate
marketing system as an organizing framework for considering the role of marketing
in societies: “The Aggregate Marketing System is recognized as different in each
society, as an adaptive human and technological institution reflecting the idio-
syncrasies of the people and their culture, geography, economic opportunities and
constraints, and sociopolitical decisions. The three primary sets of actors within
the system are (1) consumers, (2) marketers, and (3) government entities, whose
public policy decisions are meant to facilitate the maximal operations of the
system for the benefit of the host society” (p. 118).
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  115
Therefore markets can be thought of in a variety of ways. Each market might
have its own system, actors (producers, buyers, intermediaries), institutions,
procedures, social relations, and infrastructure designed around the specific types
of goods and services that are exchanged. For example, the market system for
bananas, from growing them to delivering them to your table, is quite different
from the market for primary care physicians and how they are selected and
trained and where they ultimately practice. Markets might vary in size, range,
geographical scale, location, types, and varieties of human communities, as well as
in what is traded or exchanged. They include local farmers’ markets and shopping
malls, fashion and music offerings, markets for pollution and carbon offset per-
mits, and even illegal markets, such as the ones for illicit drugs and trafficking in
women and children. As social marketers we also need to think about market-
places of ideas and behaviors and the actors in these social marketplaces: family
and peer groups, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and civil societies
(schools and universities, community and neighborhood organizations), faith
communities, the voluntary sector (such as advocates for certain groups of
patients or funding for research on certain diseases), associations that set and
govern rules for professional conduct (physician and health care membership
associations for example), the commercial sector, and government. How is the
marketplace supporting or discouraging youths’ tobacco use? Why are certain
behaviors associated with spreading levels of obesity being “bought” (adopted) by
so many different consumer segments? How can citizens become more involved
with the process of governing? How do we create a marketplace in which socially
responsible corporate behavior is normative, not simply worthy of press releases?
The Essence of Markets
In mainstream economics a market is any structure that allows buyers and sellers
to exchange any type of goods, services, and information. The exchange of goods
or services for money is a transaction. Market participants consist of all the buyers
and sellers of a good who influence its price (think of this influence also in terms
of the normative positive and negative influences that shape decisions about
behaviors—acceptance or rejection by a valued social network being a bottom
line). This influence is a major study of economics and has given rise to theories
concerning the basic market forces of supply and demand. The market itself
facilitates trade and enables the distribution and allocation of resources in a
116  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
society. Markets allow any tradable item to be evaluated and priced. A market
may emerge more or less spontaneously or may be constructed deliberately by
human interaction in order to enable the exchange of services and goods. Markets
for ideas are well regulated in some respects (think of patents and trademarks)
whereas regulation of behaviors has been left in large part to legal, regulatory,
normative, and educational influences in free societies. The important part of
markets is that while the concepts surrounding markets may be abstract, markets
are composed of people. One consequence of this fact is that people can change
markets (Hastings, 2012). Indeed, they do it every day by the decisions they
make about whether and what to purchase and, I submit, how they will behave.
Markets and Society
In many of the textbooks of the 1930s, marketing was presented as a way to
accomplish socially beneficial objectives and to move products where they were
needed with as little time and effort as was feasible (Wilkie & Moore, 2003).
There would be adequate incentives in place so that the distribution processes
could always be improved, and innovation would become part of the social
benefit of marketing. Unfortunately, this perspective on marketing was lost to
more pressing issues of the times, such as whether advertising was worth the
money, pricing practices by manufacturers and retailers (and whether government
regulation of pricing was necessary), and debates over the effectiveness of fear
appeals in advertising (a conversation that continues today with no end in sight).
By the late 1950s and 1960s, modern marketing thought and practice as we
recognize it came into its own. Key to this transition was viewing marketing from
the vantage point of the managers who were responsible for making the mar-
keting decisions in businesses (Wilkie & Moore, 2003). Many of the concepts we
use in social marketing came out of this effort to fashion marketing as a mana-
gerial or practice endeavor: market segmentation, the marketing mix, brand
image, marketing management, and marketing myopia (a condition diagnosed
and then treated by asking and then answering the question, What business are
we really in?). These concepts reinforce the heritage of viewing social marketing as
a management process, not just a blueprint from which to build programs and
campaigns (cf. Kotler, 1988).
It was shortly after this shift from an academic perspective of marketing to a
managerial one that behavioral sciences became more central to marketing
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  117
thought, notably through research and the development of various theories to
explain and influence consumer behavior. Theories that consumer marketers use
to explain purchase decisions on fast-moving consumer goods such as detergents
and condoms may not be familiar to readers who come from outside the business
and marketing field, but they may still be applicable to social marketing issues (see,
for example, Bagozzi & Lee, 1999; Petty, Barden & Wheeler, 2009).
Attention to, and concern about, the interface of marketing and society has
continued to grow (Bloom & Gundlach, 2001b; Hastings, 2012). Questions
about marketing and advertising and their impacts on social and public health
issues have received intensive scrutiny in the public health debates about tobacco
control, alcohol abuse, and food consumption, but leadership from social mar-
keters has been noticeably lacking. The consumerism movement and its off-
shoots, including the consumer and e-patient communities enabled by social and
mobile technologies (cf. Ahonen & Moore, 2005), are areas in which social
marketers have much to offer but that they, again, have largely ignored to now.
Corporate social responsibility activities have drawn the interest of some social
marketers, but usually either to tag these activities as not being social marketing
(Donovan & Henley, 2010) or to encourage companies to adopt behavior change
(aka social marketing) practices and bottom lines, not just reputational and sales
ones (Kotler & Lee, 2004).
Public policy has drawn the attention of marketing scholars for several dec-
ades but, again, has been an arena that social marketers have been slow to enter.
For many years social marketers viewed public policy as an upstream issue, after
Wallach (1980) had framed social marketing as a downstream approach, meaning
one that focused on individuals needing help (struggling in the water) and
changing their behaviors. The upstream approach, in contrast, focuses on moving
up the allegorical river to prevent people from falling into the water in the first
place (that is, experiencing market, health, or social vulnerabilities) and is more
concerned with the systemic or social determinants that are outside an indivi-
dual’s control and require more than behavior change solutions. Though social
marketers have worked to understand the difference and now speak of policy or
upstream approaches to social change (see, for example, Andreasen, 2006;
Donovan & Henley, 2010), their upstream approach tends to be to try to change
the behavior of policymakers (so they will adopt desired policies) rather than to
create changes in environments, markets, and public policies that lead to healthier
and more sustainable behaviors.
118  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
Framing social marketing in terms of upstream or downstream approaches
to behavior change has not benefited larger social policy debates or contributed
much to them. Only in the discussion of critical marketing by Hastings and
Saren (2003) has the idea been raised of applying social marketing expertise to
tobacco, food, and alcohol marketing practices and the public policies that
regulate them (or not). For example, social marketing can be a way of improving
marketing knowledge and using it to inform public policy development as
countries try to reduce tobacco use and the incidence of obesity and chronic
diseases related to overconsumption and underactivity. Understanding how
consumers perceive, appraise, and act on risk information—whether it is for a
potential public health emergency or taking their prescription medication
properly and safely—is a social marketing issue. And indeed, entire arrays of
issues considered under the rubric of consumer protection are social marketing
issues as well (for example, consumers searching for health or product infor-
mation, ethnic targeting, consumer satisfaction, quality of life, socially conscious
consumers, and health and digital privacy).
Wilkie and Moore (2003) close their review of the history of scholarly
research in marketing by calling for the inclusion of marketing and its relation-
ship to society as “an intrinsic part of mainstream marketing thought” (p. 140). I
submit that we need to make marketing and society more integral to social
marketing thought and practice as well.
SUMMARY
There is no shortage of theories that can be useful in thinking about the deter-
minants, context, and consequences of social puzzles and in guiding the devel-
opment of their possible solutions. What is clear is that models and theories of
individual behavior change are insufficient to deal with most of the puzzles we face
and at the scale at which we need to improve social conditions. Understanding that
social networks, community assets, policy and environmental influences, and
market forces can and should be considered in the analysis of social puzzles and
development of potential solutions is a step forward in improving social marketing
practice and research.
Because individuals can hold a variety of assumptions and beliefs about a
social puzzle and the people a program serves, social marketers must provide a
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  119
careful articulation of the theory of change that a program uses to understand and
describe the relationship between its actions and the outcomes it hopes to
achieve. This theory of change may be different for different puzzles, populations,
and purposes; it may also vary with the perspectives of the actors and stakeholders
involved in program planning and development. I believe that in practice there is
no reason why a theory of change should adhere rigidly to one theory over others;
that is better left to the hypothesis-testing and theory-building activities of aca-
demicians. What practitioners require are hybrid theories of change that blend
what is needed from various theories and models to identify the critical variables
for programs to focus on, explain why these variables are more important than
others, and give a clear direction for strategy development and implementation.
Such a model provides a blueprint for each step on the implementation journey
and offers a coherent framework for evaluation.
KEY TERMS
advocates
aggregate marketing system
asset-based community development
behavioral economics
boundary spanner
design thinking
diffusion of innovations
eclectic theorizing
emergence
frame problem
framing
health belief model
heuristics
integrative model of behavior prediction
micro-macro dilemma
MINDSPACE
participating elite
processes of behavior change
pro-innovation bias
rational person model
self-efficacy
service design
social capital
social-cognitive theory
stages of change model
theory of change
touchpoint
vital behavior
120  S O C I A L M A R K E T I N G A N D S O C I A L C H A N G E
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. How does a social network view of the world disrupt a traditional (individual-
oriented) approach to thinking about a public health or social puzzle? For
example, what would a network point of view suggest we do in order to respond
to signs of depression among teenagers or older adults, and how would this be
different from our response if we were focused on individual behavior?
2. Think about people you know who are boundary spanners. How have they
helped to solve a problem? Have they ever created a new one? How can we
recognize boundary spanners? How are they different from and similar to
innovators?
3. Select a specific behavior that is popular among a specific segment of the
population, and describe one or more of the markets related to it. Describe
the roles of consumers, marketers (private industry), NGOs (voluntary sector
or civil society organizations), and government entities in these markets.
What are these markets doing to facilitate or to impede the expression of the
behavior among the group? What could they do to increase or decrease it?
Who would be involved in making these decisions? How might these deci-
sions come about?
C H A P T E R 3 : D E T E R M I N A N T S , C O N T E X T , A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S  121
