ChaptEr twO
Influencing Individuals
In some cases, such as crisis management, influence operations plan-
ners will seek to influence the attitudes, beliefs, behaviors, and deci-
sions of specific individuals—for example, political leaders—while in
other cases, such as counterinsurgency, planners will focus on the other
extreme and seek to influence large segments of mass publics to sup-
port the U.S. side or to withhold support from U.S. adversaries. In
either case, an understanding of attitudes, beliefs, and how individu-
als respond to messages and actions is essential for effective influence
operations; in other words, one of the microfoundations of influence
can be found in individual-level considerations. This chapter provides
essential background on what we view as some of the theoretical and
empirical microfoundations of effective influence at the individual level
of cognition, attitudes, and behavior.
A recent review of scholarship related to the conceptualization
of attitudes, attitude formation and activation, attitude structure and
function, and the attitude-behavior relation summarized a number of
basic points about individual-level attitudes:1
There is general agreement that an attitude represents a summary•
evaluation of a psychological object (or attitude object—e.g., a
person, thing, place, or event) captured in attribute dimensions,
1 The following summary of research findings is paraphrased from Ajzen, 2001.
12 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
such as good or bad, harmful or beneficial, pleasant or unpleas-
ant, and likable or dislikable. 2
Attitude evaluations appear to be composed of multiple compo-•
nents, engendering both a cognitive dimension and an affective
one, but the contributions of affect and cognition to overall evalu-
ations can vary with the attitude object and as a function of indi-
vidual differences.
Chronically accessible beliefs (i.e., those most easily retrieved from•
memory) provide the foundation for current, relatively stable atti-
tudes, but various contextual factors can temporarily make cer-
tain beliefs more readily accessible and salient.
There is some research suggesting that stronger attitudes are more•
stable over time, more resistant to persuasion, and more predictive
of manifest behavior.
There is some evidence linking attitudes to values (favorable•
valences associated with abstract concepts such as freedom and
equality) and ample evidence linking attitudes to subjective
norms.
Much of the recent research related to the attitude-behavior•
connection has focused on the theories of reasoned action and
planned behavior (described below) and has sought to elaborate
on the relationship of attitudes and intentions to overt actions.
2 A recent review of attitudes and persuasion research described attitudes thusly:
Today, most accept the view that an attitude represents an evaluative integration of
cognitions and affects experience in relation to an object. Attitudes are evaluative judg-
ments that integrate and summarize these cognitive/affective reactions. These evaluative
abstractions vary in strength, which in turn has implications for persistence, resistance,
and attitude-behavior consistency (Crano and Prislin, 2006, p. 347).
In a similar vein, Tourangeau and Rasinski (1988) state:
Within social psychology, there is an emerging consensus that attitudes are best under-
stood as structures that reside in long-term memory and are activated when the issue or
object of the attitude is encountered. . . . In our own work, we have found it useful to
represent attitudes as networks of interrelated beliefs. Although we refer to the constitu-
ents of attitudes as beliefs, we use this term loosely to encompass memories of specific
experiences, general propositions, images, and feelings.
Influencing Individuals 13
There are a great many individual-level academic theories about
cognitive processing, attitude formation and change, attitude-behavior
consistency, social influence, and persuasion that compete for our atten-
tion in understanding the mechanisms by which individuals’ attitudes,
beliefs, or behaviors can be influenced.
As will be described, these theories differ in the variables they
emphasize in explaining attitudes and persuasion, each tends to find
some empirical support in experimental work, and each can help to
explain the conditions under which inertia in attitudes and behaviors
can be overcome and attitude change can take place. 3 Moreover, their
generally modest explanatory and predictive power highlights just how
situationally dependent the influence enterprise is; as will be seen, most
of these models fall far short of living up to the present-day frequently
used DoD slogan “perception management.”4 The literature is vast,
and the following does not discuss all of the various theories related
to influence and persuasion, but it aims to cover some of the more rel-
evant and influential theories and models that have implications for the
influence enterprise:5
Expectancy-Value Model.• The most popular conceptualization of
attitude—the expectancy-value model of Fishbein, Ajzen, and
Feather—suggests that evaluative meaning arises spontaneously
and inevitably as individuals form beliefs about an object. Fur-
3 For a good review of various characteristics associated with attitude formation and change,
see Crano and Prislin, 2006.
4 The DoD definition of perception management (DoD, 2007) actually is somewhat more
measured in tone than the term itself:
Actions to convey and/or deny selected information and indicators to foreign audiences
to influence their emotions, motives, and objective reasoning as well as to intelligence
systems and leaders at all levels to influence official estimates, ultimately resulting in
foreign behaviors and official actions favorable to the originator’s objectives. In various
ways, perception management combines truth projection, operations security, cover and
deception, and psychological operations.
See also the Wikipedia (n.d.[b]) definition of perception management.
5 For excellent reviews of attitude change and social influence, see Petty, Wegener, and
Fabrigar, 1997; Wood, 2000; Cialdini and Goldstein, 2004; Crano and Prislin, 2006.
14 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
thermore, each belief associates the attitude object with a certain
attitude, and the individual’s overall attitude toward the object
is determined by the subjective value of the object’s attributes in
interaction with the strength of the associations. This approach
also provides a theoretical framework for examining resistance
to persuasion that focuses on message acceptance, second-order
impacts on attitudes not directly addressed in messages, and the
evaluation of message attributes (see Fishbein, 1963; Fishbein and
Ajzen, 1975; and Feather, 1982). 6
Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM).• Petty and Cacioppo’s ELM
is a dual-process model. It argues that attitudes guide decisions
and other behaviors and that there are both central and peripheral
routes to persuasion.7 According to the ELM, the ability and will-
ingness of an individual to actually think about an argument and
its supporting evidence explain the likely efficacy of each route
in a given situation: When individuals are involved in trying to
understand an argument and its supporting evidence (i.e., elabo-
ration is high), the central route is more efficacious, whereas when
individuals are not involved (i.e., elaboration is low), the periph-
eral route is a more effective approach. 8
The Semantic Differential and Evaluation, Potency, Activity (EPA)•
Model. Osgood’s semantic differential and EPA model of com-
munications and attitudes aimed to serve as a bridge between the
communication of messages regarding attitude objects and the
meaning that individuals assign to these attitude objects in larger
attitude structures. Respondents evaluated different concepts and
objects using ordinal scales, the results of which were factor ana-
6 For an application of this framework to resistance to persuasion, see Ahluwalia, 2000, pp.
217–232.
7 Dual-process models are in a family of models that hold that if receivers are able and
properly motivated, they will elaborate, or systematically analyze, persuasive messages. If the
messages are well reasoned, data based, and logical, they will persuade; if they are not, they
will fail (Crano and Prislin, 2006, p. 348). Another example of a dual-process model is the
heuristic/systematic model, which is described in Chaiken, Liberman, and Eagly, 1989.
8 See Petty and Cacioppo, 1996; TCW, 2004. Chaiken’s heuristic system model also is a
dual-source model (Chaiken, 1980).
Influencing Individuals 15
lyzed, generally reducing to three underlying principal compo-
nents: a component Osgood described as “evaluative” (e.g., good
versus bad), one described as “potency” (e.g., assessing strength or
weakness), and one described as “activity” (e.g., assessing activity
versus passivity)—or, taken together, the EPA model. As docu-
mented in his books and papers, Osgood’s ambitious research
program resulted in a set of results demonstrating the underly-
ing robustness of the EPA model as a tool for characterizing atti-
tude structures and the applicability of the model across cultural
milieus (Osgood, Suci, and Tannenbaum, 1961; Osgood, 1964).
Perhaps more important, Osgood’s path-breaking work also con-
stituted a seminal early effort to represent attitude objects spa-
tially in a larger, multidimensional attitude space.9
Cognitive Dissonance Theory.• Because of its historical import, we
also note Festinger’s cognitive dissonance theory.10 In its origi-
nal form, the theory argued that individuals who hold discrep-
ant cognitions are motivated to reduce or eliminate the tension
between these cognitions by trying to bring them back into align-
ment (see Festinger, 1957, 1964).11 This can be accomplished, for
example, by changing one or more cognitions, adding new cog-
nitions, or altering the relative importance (e.g., discounting) of
certain cognitions. Subsequent research has suggested that the
concept of cognitive dissonance does not explain dissonant gen-
eralized cognitions (e.g., political views) so much as cognitions
that challenge one’s generally favorable views of oneself: Individu-
als may be motivated to realign their self-concept or engage in
9 In particular, this work was highly influential in the development of Woelfel’s Galileo
theory and method, discussed later in this chapter.
10 For a discussion of the four versions of dissonance theory that recently have generated
research interest, see Petty, Wegener, and Fabrigar, 1997, especially pp. 619–622. See also
Osgood’s model of attitude congruity (Osgood, 1960).
11 A number of factors affect the perceived magnitude of the dissonance and motivation to
address it, including the degree of discrepancy among cognitions, the number of discrep-
ant cognitions, the number of consonant cognitions held by an individual, and the relative
weights given to the consonant and dissonant cognitions, which may be adjusted by their
importance in the mind of the individual (Stephenson, n.d.).
16 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
bolstering behavior when, for example, a freely chosen behavior
results in some foreseeable negative consequence or if dissonance
arises from the violation of self-integrity.12
Also of some interest are areas of study that seek to explain changes
in attitudes and behaviors that are based on rational cognition and on
systematic departures from strict rationality:
Bounded Rationality.• Traditional economic theories of decision-
making assumed that man was a rational, utility-maximizing,
self-interested actor with perfect information. Herbert Simon’s
theory of bounded rationality argues instead that people are
partly rational but that, given the vast complexity of the world
and practical constraints on time and other resources for gather-
ing information and making decisions, human rationality is nec-
essarily bounded.13
Judgment Under Uncertainty.• Research by a number of psycholo-
gists has aimed to enrich Simon’s intuition about bounded ratio-
nality by exploring exceptions to strict rationality. Experiments
conducted by psychologists Daniel Kahneman, Amos Tversky,
and Paul Slovic (1982), for example, have shown that individuals’
use of heuristics and biases lead to departures from strict rational-
ity in the form of expected utility calculations, but that many of
these departures occur in systematic and predictable ways.14
12 See, for example, Aronson, 1969; Cooper and Fazio, 1984; Aronson, 1992; Wood, 2000,
especially pp. 546–548.
13 Simon (1957, p. 198) argued that bounded rationality arose from the fact that “the capac-
ity of the human mind for formulating and solving complex problems is very small compared
with the size of the problems whose solution is required for objectively rational behavior in
the real world—or even for a reasonable approximation to such objective rationality.” For a
review of Simon’s contributions to political science and an analysis of his intended meaning
for bounded rationality, see Bendor, 2003.
14 A popular example is the tendency of individuals to be risk seeking in prospects involving
sure losses and risk averse in gambles involving sure gains (see Kahneman and Tversky, 1979;
Levy, 1997. The work of the psychologist Philip Tetlock also is apposite.
Influencing Individuals 17
Among the more prominent theories that address the issue of
attitude-behavior consistency are two theories associated with psy-
chologist Icek Ajzen: the theory of reasoned action and the theory of
planned behavior.15 The theory of reasoned action says that individuals’
intentions are the best guides to their behavior and that their inten-
tions are, in turn, guided by their attitudes toward the behavior and
the subjective norm related to that behavior. The theory of planned
behavior is an extension of the theory of reasoned action and adds a
third variable—perceived behavioral control—as an additional predic-
tor of behavior.16
A number of other theories seek to account for social influences
on attitude formation and changes in behavior:
Social Learning Theory.• Miller and Dollard’s social learning theory
(1941) argues that behavioral change incorporates the principles
of learning, which include reinforcement, punishment, extinc-
tion, and imitation of models (see also Bandura, 1977). Current
variants of the theory generally hold that (1) response conse-
quences (e.g., reward and punishment) influence the likelihood
that a person will perform a particular behavior again in a given
situation; (2) humans can learn by observing others; and (3) indi-
viduals are most likely to model behavior of others with whom
they identify (see “Social Cognitive Theory,” n.d.).
Social Cognitive Theory.• Albert Bandura’s social cognitive theory
(1973; 1986) holds that individuals learn by observing and mod-
eling others’ behavior. Bandura posits four conditions for learning
by modeling others’ behavior: (1) the individual must be paying
attention to the model, (2) the individual must be able to remem-
ber the behavior that has been observed, (3) the individual must
be able to replicate the behavior, and (4) the individual must be
motivated to demonstrate the learned behavior (Ormrod, 1998).
15 For a review of recent research in this area, see Ajzen, 2001.
16 For a discussion of the theory of reasoned action, see Fishbein and Ajzen, 1975; Ajzen and
Fishbein, 1980. The theory of planned behavior is described in Ajzen, 1985.
18 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
Also, likely to be of interest to some readers is a small literature deal-
ing with a related set of factors that are associated with resistance to
persuasive efforts.17
Engineering Attitude Change
While some general theories do stand out—the expectancy-value
model, the elaboration likelihood method, social power theory, and
the theory of planned behavior, for example—readers of the foregoing
might well conclude that understanding individual- or group-level atti-
tudes will require an ensemble of different theories, tools, and analytic
activities to ascertain and foster desired shifts in attitudes and behav-
iors through appropriately tailored messages and policies. They would
be largely correct in reaching this conclusion; as described above, the
influence enterprise is vastly complicated and requires substantial anal-
ysis and testing to avoid the most obvious mistakes and pitfalls that
have been identified by various research programs. There has, how-
ever, also been some effort to put forth analytic approaches that, like
Osgood’s EPA model, might provide a more general and systematic
basis for mapping attitudes—and for planning communications that
can shift these attitudes in desired ways.
One of the more interesting approaches to communication and
attitude change we found was Joseph Woelfel’s metric multidimen-
sional scaling approach, which is called Galileo.18 In many ways,
17 Beyond Fishbein and Ajzen (1980), see for example, McGuire and Papageorgis, 1962;
Anderson and McGuire, 1965; Voghs and Garrett, 1968; Ahluwalia, 2000.
18 See, for example, Woelfel and Fink, 1980; Woelfel et al., n.d.(a); Barnett, Serota, and
Taylor, 1976; Barnett and Woelfel, 1979; Woelfel et al., n.d.(b); Woelfel, Hernandez, and
Allen, n.d.; Woelfel, 1981; Danes, Hunter, and Woelfel, 1984. Most of these works are avail-
able from the Galileo Web site (n.d.).
Another approach worth mentioning was developed by Bud Whiteman of Booz Allen Ham-
ilton. It includes a framework for assessing PSYOP mission effectiveness that systematically
addresses the sorts of challenges that must be overcome for successful influence efforts to
occur. That framework strongly resembles the simple model presented here. In brief, White-
man provides a top-down methodology for quantifying PSYOP mission effectiveness based
on PSYOP objectives, supporting PSYOP objectives, and appeals to target audiences. White-
Influencing Individuals 19
Woelfel’s theory was the closest that any social science approach came
to providing the basis for an end-to-end engineering solution for plan-
ning, conducting, and assessing the impact of communications on
attitudes and behaviors.19 This theory appears to provide a generalized
framework for
measuring attitudes, beliefs, cultural factors, and other psycholog-•
ical or cognitive phenomena through the use of paired compari-
sons of distances between objects using a standardized metric
visualizing attitude structures in a multidimensional space in•
which the distance between attitude objects connotes their simi-
larity or dissimilarity, with attitude objects that are judged to be
similar closer together and those judged to be dissimilar farther
apart
assessing the degree of similarity in attitude structure within sub-•
groups based on the dispersion around the average positions of
attitude objects in multidimensional space
assessing the level of crystallization, stability, or inertia in atti-•
tudes by comparing the average position of attitude objects in
space at different time intervals and ascertaining whether differ-
ences are accountable to a lack of crystallization in beliefs about
the objects or whether they actually reflect the movement of these
objects in response to persuasive messages or other factors
identifying the most effective and efficient campaign themes and•
messages for changing attitudes in a target audience by identify-
ing where in multidimensional space an attitude object (e.g., “the
United States”) is relative to other concepts, such as “good” and
man treats the influence process in much the same way as we describe our influence model,
and he computes separate probabilities for receipt, acceptance, and attitudinal or behavior
change in accordance with a message. Target audiences can be divided into subgroups that
differ in terms of their preconditioning to accept or reject a message, such that the intensity
of messages required to change attitudes and behaviors can vary by group. Whiteman, 2004,
represents a very useful contribution to thinking about the influence process in an end-to-
end way. Whiteman’s model builds on Kerchner, Deckro, and Kloeber, 1999.
19 A great number of Galileo theory–related papers are available at the Galileo Web site
(n.d.).
20 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
“evil,” and what other attitude objects (e.g., “England”) might be
associated with “the United States” to move it to a more favorable
position.
Galileo theory conceives of attitudes, beliefs, cultures, and other
ideational phenomena as attitude objects in multidimensional space
(Woelfel and Fink, 1980, p. x.):
[Galileo] defines cognitive and cultural processes as changes in
the relations among sets of cultural “objects” or concepts. The
interrelationships among these objects are themselves measured
by magnitude estimation pair comparisons, and the resulting dis-
similarities matrices are entered into metric multidimensional
scaling programs. The result of this work is that each of the cul-
tural objects is represented as a point in a multidimensional Rie-
mann space. Cognitive and cultural processes may be defined
within this framework as motions of these objects relative to the
other objects within the space. 20
The Galileo metric multidimensional system’s conversion of
distances between objects to multidimensional maps of an attitude
“space” can perhaps be best understood using a simple example. If we
constructed a table of all pair-wise distances between major cities in
the United States, conducted a factor analysis of these data, and then
plotted the first two principal components of the factor analytic solu-
tion, the relative position of each city would be essentially identical to
its relative position on a physical map. 21 In a similar way, the distances
between attitude objects can be used to construct a “map” of attitude
objects in an individual’s attitude space, on which the distance between
attitude objects connotes their similarity or dissimilarity.
20 To clarify, researchers obtain similarity ratio judgments of the distances between
objects.
21 Because the United States is wider than it is tall, the first component of a factor analysis
of the distances between all U.S. cities would be expected to correspond to longitude, the
second to latitude.
Influencing Individuals 21
To illustrate, Figure 2.1 presents, in a three-dimensional form,
the results from a Galileo survey instrument that asked respondents for
their judgments about a number of attitude objects related to the 1988
presidential contest between then-Vice President George H.W. Bush
and then-governor of Massachusetts Michael Dukakis. In the figure, a
variety of attitude objects related to the presidential campaign are pro-
jected in the same space, including
evaluative criteria, such as conservative and liberal, pro-choice,•
honest, likeable, experienced, and evil
people, including Bush, Reagan, Dukakis, and• you (the
respondent)
Figure 2.1
Attitude Objects in Multidimensional Space
SOURCE: Galileo Web site, n.d.
RAND MG654-2.1
Taxes
President
Liberal
Foreign
policies
Dukakis
Middle
class
Pro-choice
Honest
Good
Evil
Likeable
You
Bush
Reagan
Conservative
Galileo
Experience
Total Capital District
22 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
other attitude objects, such as president, taxes, foreign policies,•
and middle class.
The figure shows that certain concepts cluster in natural ways.
For example, Dukakis, Liberal, and pro-choice are all clustered together
toward the right of the figure, suggesting that respondents generally
viewed Governor Dukakis as embracing traditional liberal positions.
By comparison, Bush, Reagan, and conservative are clustered toward
the left side, suggesting that Bush was linked to his predecessor and
traditional conservative positions. Finally, you (the respondent), like-
able, honest, and good are all clustered together at the front of the figure,
connoting that respondents to the survey generally viewed themselves
in highly favorable terms.
As described above, the distances between objects in the figure
connotes shared attributes: for example, Reagan appears to be closer to
president (i.e., he was, after all, president at the time) than either Bush
or Dukakis; Dukakis is more liberal and pro-choice than Bush is; and so
on.
Procedurally, Galileo theory requires respondents to estimate the
distance between pairs of attitude objects using a standard ratio-level
metric of distances between attitude objects. For example, the survey
instrument might state that the distance between good and evil is 100
and then ask the respondent to estimate the distance between other
pairs of attitude objects (e.g., between bin Laden and evil, bin Laden
and good, and so on) using that first metric between good and evil as a
standard-length rod. The matrix of paired distances creates a coordi-
nate system that can be transformed to principal axes using the eigen-
vectors associated with the matrix and yielding the sort of multidimen-
sional “map” of the objects portrayed in Figure 2.1. 22
In this framework, efforts to influence change amount to forc-
ing objects to move in this multidimensional space by seeking to
strengthen or weaken the connections (distances) between them. Thus,
campaign strategies to move Bush or Dukakis closer to the respondent
22 Woelfel and Fink (1980, pp. 58–65) demonstrate how a matrix of distances between cities
can be transformed into a two-dimensional map using this approach.
Influencing Individuals 23
(you)—and thereby improve the prospects for gaining the respondent’s
vote—could include trying to more closely associate one or the other
candidate with honesty, likeability, or goodness, characteristics that the
respondent associates with him- or herself. Another strategy might be to
more closely associate the candidate with being presidential (president),
an attitude object that appears to be closer to the respondent than does
either candidate. Galileo theory actually provides formal mathemati-
cal procedures for identifying the themes and messages that are most
likely to move a candidate or other object in the desired direction. 23 To
summarize, Galileo theory appears to us to be a potentially promising
approach for mapping attitudes and reasoning about how best to tailor
messages to shift key attitudes.
Influencing Individuals: Conclusions
This chapter has reviewed a number of individual-level theories about
cognition, attitude formation, and attitude change that offer important
insights into the processes that can lead to the persuasion of individu-
als to change relevant attitudes and behaviors. These theories provide
a microfoundation for influence efforts at the individual, group, and
mass level and, when used as diagnostic tools or frameworks for devel-
oping communications, may help planners of influence operations by
focusing attention on the key variables that regulate the efficacy of per-
suasive communications.
Although some of the models just described are somewhat general
in nature, the poverty of riches created by these competing models sug-
gests the absence of a larger meta-theory or model that integrates and
harmonizes these various perspectives—and their empirical support—
in a coherent and operational way (Raven, 1990). Such a meta-theory,
if it integrated and harmonized the most robust theoretical and empiri-
cal findings, would seem to be exceedingly useful to planners.
23 See, for example, Joseph Woelfel et al., n.d.(a); Barnett, Serota, and Taylor, 1976; Woelfel
et al., n.d.(b).
24 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
Although such a larger meta-theory is beyond the scope of our
study, it may be fruitful to step back from the details of the various
theories and to conceive of each of these theories as generally falling
into one of three main approaches, focusing on (1) emotions, values,
and “hot” cognitive processes and the results of “targeting the heart”;
(2) rational, cognitive, or “cool” processes and the results of “targeting
the head”; and (3) pressures for social conformity (see Figure 2.2 and
Wood, 2000). 24
The figure suggests the following:
In broad terms, a pure messaging strategy (e.g., appealing to1.
emotions) or various mixes of emotional, cognitive, and social
appeals can be relied upon to accomplish influence aims.
Figure 2.2
Alternative Domains for Persuasive Appeals
RAND MG654-2.2
Emotions/values
(hot) Social/conformity
Rational/cognitive
(cool)
24 Kazuo Yamaguchi (2000) provides a “non-expected” utility-based analysis of collective
action. For a review of the literature on social influence and conformity, see Moscovici, 1985.
For a relatively recent review of the social influence literature, see Cialdini and Goldstein,
2004.
Influencing Individuals 25
The efficacy of these appeals will depend heavily on factors that2.
are under the control of the planner and many situational fac-
tors that are completely outside of the planner’s control.
There is, as a result, likely to be an inherent trial-and-error qual-3.
ity to influence efforts. This quality dictates the need for a robust
capacity for assessing effects and adapting influence activities as
feedback becomes available.
Given the heterogeneous nature of many target audiences and the
substantial uncertainties regarding whether appeals to emotions and
values, rational calculations, or social conformity will be most influen-
tial, influence campaign planners and message developers accordingly
may wish to “hedge,” through campaigns that utilize a mix of message
types that test the efficacy of various communications approaches and
by embracing a trial-and-error approach that tests the relative potency
of each type of appeal and adapts the campaign based on the results. 25
And given the innumerable ways that influence campaigns can go
awry, an adaptive approach to planning, execution, and assessment
could offer planners the best chance for success.
Looking at the glass as half full, then, planners may expect that
these various theories and models may be useful as diagnostic tools
that can be used to help avoid some of the more obvious mistakes and
pitfalls. And in some cases, planners may even find some useful con-
cepts in the ensemble of available research theories that can strengthen
the empirical basis for the development of persuasive communications
underwriting influence strategies.
Perhaps even more challenging still is the fact that scholars and
other practitioners have pretty consistently pointed to the dominance
of situational factors that confound the ability of individual academic
theories of attitude and persuasion to actually explain and predict
25 Obviously, to keep them simple, planners might construct messages to target audiences
that accent emotional, rational, or social conformity, but it would be possible to direct sepa-
rate messages utilizing different appeal types to the same target audience—or to mix the
nature of the appeals in these messages.
26 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
observed behaviors. 26 “We will not find a high correlation between
attitude and behavior if situational pressures substantially contribute
to the observed behavior—and they almost always do” (Kiesler, Col-
lins, and Miller, 1969, pp. 29–30). This view has not fundamentally
changed since then (Upmeyer and Six, 1989, p. 16):
In terms of cost considerations, an incredible amount of money is
being spent in applied psychology, marketing, and survey research
that can hardly be justified by the strength of the covariation
presently found in attitude-behavior relationships.
“I know I’m wasting half of my advertising budget. I just don’t
know which half . . . .”27
This finding also is echoed in J.A.C. Brown’s (1963, pp. 103, 148)
analysis of propaganda in World Wars I and II,28 which concludes
that situational factors were the dominant ones in determining the
success or failure of wartime propaganda efforts:
[P]ropaganda is successful only when directed at those who are
willing to listen, absorb the information, and if possible act on
it, and this happens only when the other side is in a condition of
lowered morale and is already losing the campaign. . . . War pro-
paganda can often change attitudes but, unless the real situation
is catastrophic, it rarely changes behavior; and propaganda which
does not lead to action has very largely failed.
26 For example, Crano and Prislin (2006) reported that Armitage and Conner’s (2001)
review of meta-analyses of the theory of planned behavior found that the constitutive ele-
ments of the theory explained 18 percent of the variance in intentions and 13 percent of
the variation in subsequent behaviors, while Sheeran’s (2002) review found that intentions
explained 28 percent of the variance in subsequent behavior.
27 Attributed to department store founder John Wanamaker (1838–1922), who was a pio-
neer in the use of newspaper advertising to promote his department stores.
28 We are grateful to Ren Stelloh of PhaseOne Communications for bringing this analysis
to our attention. Appendix C contains two case studies of influence in public diplomacy.
Influencing Individuals 27
Moreover, despite the availability of sophisticated theoretical and
empirical work, present-day businesses appear to be no better served by
their advertising and marketing spending than those who were involved
in wartime propaganda efforts. In fact, recent estimates suggest that
business continues to waste about half of its spending on advertising. 29
Given the greater difficulties of “selling America” than selling soap,
beer, and running shoes, it should, therefore, be little surprise that
recent U.S. government public diplomacy initiatives that naïvely place
their faith in “the magic of Madison Avenue” have yielded such modest
results.30
Put simply—and at the risk of appearing overly pessimistic about
the overall prospects for influence operations—there are many reasons
to believe that the scholarly literature, for the level of the individual,
contains more lessons about specific factors that account for a failure
to influence, many of which are outside the control of planners, than
general rules that can guide successful influence efforts. 31
29 A trade association called the Interactive Advertising Bureau estimates that advertisers
send messages that reach the wrong audience or none at all about half of the time, thereby
wasting $112 billion a year in America and $220 billion worldwide, or just over half of the
total estimated spending on advertising of $428 billion per year. See “Special Report,” 2006.
For additional evidence that about half of advertising dollars are wasted, see Appendix A.
Relevant theoretical work includes Dorfman and Steiner, 1954; Weber, 1975; Sasieni, 1989.
An interesting empirical effort to relate brand awareness to advertising efforts can be found
in Brown, 1986.
30 The appointment of Madison Avenue advertising executive Charlotte Beers to run the
U.S. State Department’s public diplomacy effort was perhaps the most famous example, but
the naïve view that an understanding of advertising techniques alone will be sufficient to
influence foreign audiences persists in some circles. See “From Uncle Ben’s to Uncle Sam,”
2002; “Business: Selling the Flag; Face Value,” 2004. Appendix A contains a detailed case
study of commercial advertising and marketing approaches to influence.
31 A good example is the result that an individual’s mood can affect the likelihood of mes-
sage acceptance. See Wegener, Petty, and Klein, 1997.
