ChaptEr SIx
A Framework for Influence Operations
The preceding chapters reviewed the theoretical and empirical litera-
ture related to influence at the individual, group and network, leader-
ship coalition, and mass public levels. We next provide a framework for
planning and conducting influence operations that is based on the var-
ious social science approaches, tools, and methodologies we reviewed
and on the key lessons from our case studies.
Planning Requirements
Our research led to a set of nine key planning questions that can gener-
ally be divided into those dealing with strategic-level issues and those
dealing with target audiences. We believe that these questions can pro-
vide an efficient, top-down basis for developing influence strategies
that can contribute to the achievement of U.S. objectives.
Questions About Strategic Issues
The first four questions generally focus on the strategic-level picture
and the underlying political dynamics related to achievement of U.S.
coalition objectives:
What are current U.S. objectives? Are current objectives likely to•
be achieved, and if not, what outcomes are most likely under pres-
ent or plausible conditions?
Which actors or groups are most influential in political-military•
outcomes?
72 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
What strategies (e.g., force or negotiation) are most likely to influ-•
ence these groups and yield desired outcomes?
How much authority/influence do group leaders have over their•
supporters/followers?
These questions are of greatest interest to the White House, to
National Security Council staff, and to such interagency actors as the
Departments of State and Defense. They will also interest the regional
component commander and joint force commander and most likely
would need to be addressed by intelligence analysts working for
the services, the Department of Defense, or the larger intelligence
community.
What are current U.S. objectives? Are current objectives likely to
be achieved, and if not, what outcomes are most likely under present
or plausible conditions?
Of substantial interest to policymakers and military commanders
is whether current political and campaign objectives are achievable with
the current strategy and resources, whether adjustments to strategy or
resources will be needed, or whether objectives are essentially unattain-
able given any realistic strategy or level of resource commitment.
In the case of Iraq, for example, it would have been useful to poli-
cymakers and commanders to know that U.S. and coalition forces likely
were sufficient to overthrow Hussein’s regime and force the collapse of
Iraqi regular forces but insufficient to restore security in the leader-
ship vacuum that followed, and that a prolonged insurgency should be
expected to organize around Hussein’s security forces, former regime
elements, and disaffected Sunni supporters.1 With such knowledge, a
concerted influence strategy might have been developed to deal with
these challenges prior to the war. 2
1 Ambassador L. Paul Bremer, administrator of the Coalitional Provisional Authority in
Iraq, reportedly requested additional troops to manage the deteriorating security situation in
Iraq early in his tenure (Wright and Ricks, 2004, p. A1).
2 Baranick et al., 2004, present EUM results that forecast the defeat of Saddam’s regime,
the collapse of the Iraqi military, and the emergence of a prolonged insurgency. One of the
present authors (Larson) conducted the analysis of Iraqi political society and provided data
for this effort.
a Framework for Influence Operations 73
As was described in Chapter Four, agent-based rational choice
or expected utility models appear to us to be ideally suited to address-
ing these questions and the next. Through analysis of stakeholders and
simulation analyses of coalition maneuvering on a set of policy issues,
planners can gain important insights into the most likely outcomes,
the efficacy of the U.S. position, and whether capabilities are likely to
prove sufficient for achieving U.S. objectives.
Which actors or groups are most influential in political-military
outcomes?
As suggested earlier, given that available resources are finite, it is
important that influence operations focus on those actors and groups
that will be most influential to overall outcomes. Again, agent-based
rational choice or expected utility models can be employed to gauge
the sensitivity of outcomes to adjustments in various stakeholders’ posi-
tions, resources, or salience, which can illuminate high-payoff areas for
the development of policy and strategy options.
What strategies (e.g., force or negotiation) are most likely to
influence these groups and yield desired outcomes?
In a similar vein, it is critically important to understand whether
a conciliatory strategy relying exclusively on positive inducements, a
strategy of threats or use of force, some mix of positive and negative
inducements, or some form of conditional reciprocity is most likely to
succeed in influencing various actors and stakeholder groups and what
results might reasonably be expected from these efforts. Put another
way, differences among actors or stakeholder groups may require a dif-
ferentiated set of substrategies, one for each target.
Diagnostic tools for evaluating the suitability of different influ-
ence strategies, as discussed in Chapter Four, and agent-based rational
choice or expected utility models may be helpful in illuminating the
best strategies for influencing the highest-payoff stakeholder groups.
How much authority/influence do group leaders have over their
supporters/followers?
As described in Chapter Three, leadership, influence, follower-
ship, and group discipline are all important determinants of the basic
approach to influence operations at the group and network levels of
analysis.
74 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
To illustrate, in the best case, the United States would be able to
identify a single leader with high social power or influence for each
stakeholder group or network, persuade each to cooperate in helping
the United States to achieve its aims, and know that each leader’s fol-
lowers were sufficiently well-informed to know about their leader’s
position and sufficiently disciplined to follow their leader in cooperat-
ing with the United States. This approach would be the most efficient
one because, in theory at least, all it requires is influencing one person
(the leader) from each group.
In the worst case, on the other hand, planners would need to try
to separately influence each member of a group in the hope of get-
ting most of that group to go along with U.S. aims. This approach
is far less efficient, because it could require influencing thousands or
even millions of individuals. Moreover, within-group heterogeneity
may necessitate further efforts to understand subgroup characteristics
that will condition the likelihood of being aware of a message, accept-
ing the message, or acting upon the message in a desired way. Among
the more valuable models at this level of analysis would appear to be
social power/interaction theory, social choice, and opinion leadership
models.
Questions About the Target Audiences
Once planners have identified the key stakeholder groups that are to
be targeted, including the nature of influence within these groups or
networks, five additional questions need to be answered for each of the
key target audiences identified during influence strategy development
so that effective substrategies can be developed for each:
Which sources and information channels do target audiences use•
and find most credible?
How are target audiences’ attitudes structured, and how stable•
are they?
What messages are they already receiving?•
What message sources, content, and formats are most likely to be•
accepted and to foster change?
a Framework for Influence Operations 75
How many messages need to be sent to them? What other actions•
need to be taken to achieve influence objectives?
Each question is discussed below.
Which sources and information channels do target audiences
use and find most credible?
As was described in Chapter Two, for influence operations to suc-
ceed, the first challenge is ensuring that messages reach their intended
target audiences. At the most basic level, this means transmitting the
messages via information channels that members of the target audience
actually use and find credible.
In the best (but perhaps not the most realistic) case, individuals
would rely upon a single source for news and political information,
such as a newspaper, television, or a radio station, and believe that the
information received through this channel was highly credible. In this
case, if the message could be successfully inserted into this source, it
would reach a very large percentage of its intended audience.
In the worst case, individuals would rely upon a great many
sources for news and political information, many of which might be
discounted as being not entirely reliable or credible. This situation
would vastly complicate the choice of which information channels to
use to transmit the messages to the intended audiences and the chances
of achieving a high probability that they receive the messages.
Closely related to the credibility of alternative information chan-
nels are the credibility and trustworthiness of different opinion leaders;
although this issue needs to be addressed in group- or network-level
analyses, a higher level of resolution and fidelity may be needed at this
stage.
To satisfactorily address these questions, a mix of focus groups,
public opinion attitude surveys, and other means that can illuminate
respondents’ media usage, the credibility of various leaders, and other
factors would be required to map these unique characteristics to dis-
tinct stakeholder groups.
76 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
How are target audiences’ attitudes structured, and how stable
are they?
In influence operations that aim to affect adversary or other lead-
ers’ decisions, it is important to act before key decisions have been made
(i.e., “getting inside the OODA [observe-orient-decide-act] loop”). Part
of this means that planners need to understand the administrative,
organizational, and other procedures and processes that establish the
decisionmaking environment for these leaders, their decisionmaking
rules or doctrine, and any factionalization of the leadership over the
issue being decided. But it also may require actor-specific behavioral
models that capture how individuals’ cognitive, psychological, emo-
tional, or normative priors affect their susceptibility—or lack of sus-
ceptibility—to being influenced (George, 2002).
The analogue for mass publics is understanding how cognitive,
psychological, cultural, emotional, or normative factors combine in
individuals’ attitudes and preferences on an issue. Also important
is understanding which attitudes are essentially inert, stable, and
unchangeable, because, for example, they reflect deeply held religious
or ethical values or mores, cultural taboos, or shibboleths or because
they are already crystallized as a result of having been thought seri-
ously about (the issue already being understood). Effective influence
operations will focus on key attitudes, to be sure, but planners should
not waste resources striving to change attitudes that are exceedingly
unlikely to change.
Prominent among the general approaches for addressing this
question is Woelfel’s metric multidimensional scaling approach to rep-
resenting attitudes in multidimensional attitude space, which has the
additional felicitous feature that it appears to provide an environment
for assessing the efficacy of different messages in fostering attitude or
behavioral change.
What messages are they already receiving?
Most individuals in Western—and many non-Western—societies
live in highly competitive, media-saturated environments that deliver
a wide range of messages to key target audiences. Understanding the
messages that target audiences already may be receiving in their infor-
mation environment is therefore essential, so that the nature of any
a Framework for Influence Operations 77
competition in the “war of ideas” is fully understood, but also because
effective messages may seek to increase the likelihood of message accep-
tance by repeating certain themes or arguments that already have been
accepted by an audience as being true and credible.
We view content analysis of leadership and media streams and
focus group analyses and attitude surveys to tap audience exposure to
or awareness of content as providing robust approaches for addressing
this question.
What message sources, content, and formats are most likely to
be accepted and to foster change?
As described in Chapter Two, message acceptance turns on a host
of message-related and situational factors. These include sourcing of
messages to individuals who are trusted and liked by the target audi-
ence, avoiding unnecessary complexity that would increase the cogni-
tive demands on the audience, and ensuring that the format and con-
tent of a message motivate the audience to pay attention to the message
and ultimately to accept and act on it.
The answer to this set of questions depends greatly on what sort of
attitudinal or behavior change is sought. The various characteristics of
the target audience—cultural, religious, cognitive, and otherwise—may
present either opportunities or challenges for increasing the potency of
the message.
As described above, the use of various generalized individual-level
theories, including employment of metric multidimensional scaling
techniques, coupled with focus groups or attitude surveys, can offer
insights into these questions.
For example, the following sorts of steps could be used to make
operational use of metric multidimensional scaling or similar tech-
niques as an environment for designing and assessing the impact of
influence operations:
Identifying the objectives of influence efforts with respect to each•
target audience
Developing appropriate survey instruments that are easy to admin-•
ister in order to understand how culture, attitudes, and cognitions
are structured within target audiences
78 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
Conducting surveys of, or experiments with, target audiences•
using the instrument
Analyzing the resulting data to understand how attitude objects•
are arranged in this larger multidimensional cultural space and
to identify the most promising candidate themes for inclusion in
messages
Refinement and testing of messages containing the highest-payoff•
themes
Conducting follow-up surveys of, or experiments with, target•
audiences and assessing the impact of the messages on target
audiences
Refining or revising the campaign, as needed.•
To be clear, it seems most likely that, given its highly technical
nature, metric multidimensional scaling analyses probably would not
be conducted by U.S. Army or DoD personnel, but rather would need
to be conducted by academic or commercial researchers. Our judgment
is that Galileo appears to us to be worthy of further testing to establish
its utility to and suitability for influence operations. Once this has been
accomplished, if the basic data collection and analysis challenges also
can be overcome, Galileo theory may well prove to be a highly useful
tool for planning and assessing influence operations.
How many messages need to be sent to them? What other
actions need to be taken?
While the number of times a message is sent to an individual
clearly affects the probability that the individual will become aware of
the message, and the number may affect the likelihood that the indi-
vidual will accept and act on messages that he or she is already predis-
posed to accept and act upon, there is little evidence that simply repeat-
ing a message will break down a preexisting inclination to reject the
message. Even in its most extreme form—thought reform (what is pop-
ularly referred to as “brainwashing”), in which virtually every aspect
of an individual’s life can be controlled and manipulated by his or her
captors—permanent changes in attitudes and behaviors have proved
elusive. To expect greater success in pluralistic information environ-
a Framework for Influence Operations 79
ments in which the target audience does not consist of prisoners of war
would be unwarranted.
As was described in Chapters Two and Five (and will be discussed
in more detail in Appendixes A, B, and C), receptivity to messages can
vary greatly in a heterogeneous population. At some point, additional
messages may actually prove to be counterproductive, even for those
who are most predisposed to accept them.
For example, a November 2004 article on White House political
advisor Karl W. Rove reported the following interesting observation
on the relationship between the number of communications and their
impact:
Rove’s direct-mail experience had provided him with a nuanced
understanding of precisely what motivates ticket-splitters. Accord-
ing to Karl Rove & Co. data on the 1994 Texas governor’s race,
Rove was aware, for instance, that households that received a
single piece of mail turned out for Bush at a rate of 15.45 per-
cent, and those that received three pieces at a rate of 50.83 per-
cent. Turnout peaked at seven pieces (57.88 percent), after which
enthusiasm for Bush presumably gave way to feelings of inunda-
tion, and support began to drop (Green, 2004).
Figure 6.1 suggests how the probability of message acceptance
might be affected by the number of messages for three different notional
groups: those who are highly predisposed to accept and act on the mes-
sage (“High”), those who are moderately predisposed to accept the
message (“Med”), and those who generally have a low predisposition to
accept the message (or high predisposition to reject it) (“Low”).
The figure shows the diminishing—and then negative—returns
to sending additional messages, each of which has a different dose-
response curve. The implication is that a message campaign will be
most effective and efficient for those who already are highly predis-
posed to accept the message and least effective and efficient—even to
the point of potentially not being worth the effort—for those who have
a low predisposition to accept the message (or high predisposition to
80 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
Figure 6.1
Notional Probability of Accepting a Message Based on High, Medium, or
Low Predisposition
RAND MG654-6.1
0.45
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.50
0
98765
Number of messages
43210 10
Probability (acceptance) 0.40
0.35
0.30
High
Medium
Low
reject it).3 And in most cases, there are either diminishing or even nega-
tive returns to sending additional messages.
As in Rove’s case, influence operation planners would need a
strong capability to track messages and assess the relationship between
the number and variety of messages and the probability of individuals
becoming aware of and accepting these messages. Again, focus groups
and attitude surveys would appear to be the most systematic way of
collecting such information, but face-to-face interactions by patrols
might help to illuminate this question.
3 This sort of result also can be observed in so-called “rallies” in support for presidents:
Those most likely to rally are members of the president’s own party or core, and those least
likely are his political opponents.
a Framework for Influence Operations 81
Some Additional Planning Considerations
Effective influence operations generally require a top-down planning
and assessment process that links metrics in a systematic way to politi-
cal and campaign objectives and to the political, military, and other
activities that are conducted to promote these objectives. From a func-
tional perspective, the planning and execution of successful influence
operations involve a number of discrete steps:
Specifying the political and campaign objectives.• Political objectives
are specified by the president and his senior advisors and staff,
while campaign objectives, tasks, and metrics are specified by the
joint force commander and his or her staff.
Developing and planning an influence strategy supporting these•
objectives. The influence strategy should identify the key target
audiences that need to be influenced to achieve each objective
and the specific aims (e.g., “reject the insurgency”) and substrate-
gies (e.g., negotiation or coercion, carrots, and sticks) with respect
to each target audience. It also should identify the communica-
tion channels, themes, and messages to be directed at each target
audience and how influence activities will be coordinated and
synchronized.
Executing the influence strategy.• Synchronizing influence opera-
tions with policy adjustments, carrots and sticks, kinetics, etc.
should be included.
Monitoring and assessing the influence strategy.•
Adapting the influence strategy as necessary.• 4
In applying these steps, moreover, planners need to consider the
element of time: It matters greatly whether planners are seeking to
influence target audiences in peacetime, crisis, conventional warfare,
or stability environments:
4 The subject of a metrics-based planning and assessment process is beyond the scope of the
present effort but is discussed in detail in Larson et al., forthcoming.
82 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
In• peacetime, influence operations seek to shape the environment
by persuading, dissuading, deterring, and reassuring—activities
that are supported by intelligence and analytic efforts to assess
the attitudes, behaviors, intentions, and capabilities of target
audiences.
Influence operations during a• crisis may aim to persuade or coerce
an adversary or to control escalation, again supported by intelli-
gence and analytic activities.
Influence operations during• major combat operations generally aim
to terminate the war on favorable terms.
Influence operations during• stability operations generally aim to
reestablish a stable postwar political equilibrium by persuading
and reassuring actors that their best interests lie in peaceful politi-
cal processes, for example, and dissuading or deterring them from
joining or supporting insurgents and others who oppose U.S. and
coalition aims.
It is important to point out two additional considerations in plan-
ning and conducting influence operations over time.
First, the transitions—e.g., from peacetime to crisis, crisis to
major combat operations, or major combat to stability operations—
may not be clearly delineated. It is quite likely, for example, that even
as major combat operations are concluded and give way to security,
stability, and reconstruction operations in one sector, they may still be
continuing in other sectors. Put another way, rather than constituting
distinct phases, different mixes of these activities may be observed over
time and in different locations.
Second, although they frequently are executed to support the
achievement of intermediate objectives, influence operations must be
planned and conducted in a way that takes the long view of the ulti-
mate political and operational end-state that is desired. In the case of
military operations that aim at regime change, for example, influence
operations conducted through peacetime, crisis, and war should seek
to minimize the challenges of facilitating the emergence of a moderate,
stable, peaceful, and otherwise acceptable postwar political society by
a Framework for Influence Operations 83
seeking to influence political actors who will be important in achieving
U.S. postwar security, political, economic, and other objectives.
As described in this report, to achieve their strategic and campaign
objectives, planners may need to influence individuals, small groups or
networks, leadership coalitions, or mass publics. Whereas our presenta-
tion of the social science literature in Chapters Two through Five took
a building-block approach, moving in turn from the individual level up
to the level of mass publics, the functional requirements of influence
operations require that planners generally work in the opposition direc-
tion, from their goals and objectives to a decomposition of what needs
to be done to achieve those goals and objectives.
A Framework for Influence Operations: Conclusions
Above, we tied together the various social science theories, models, and
empirical results at levels of the individual, group or network, leader-
ship coalition, and mass public in the form of a set of analytic questions
that planners need to answer for effective influence operations to be
possible. We also identified specific analytic techniques for answering
these questions. The next chapter summarizes the implications of our
research on influence operations for the Army and for joint operations
and offers conclusions.

85
ChaptEr SEvEn
Implications for Planners
As described in this report there are a number of characteristics that
seem to be associated with effective influence operations:
They are aimed at achieving• specific desired objectives and effects,
typically a change in a key attitude, belief, preferred policy, or
behavior.
They are directed toward• key target audiences, whether an indi-
vidual, a decisionmaking group, a military unit, a population sub-
group, or the mass public of a nation.
They make use of the most effective combination of• information
channels, i.e., those channels that are both most likely to reach the
target audience and are most likely to be viewed as unbiased and
credible.
They are mindful of• audience characteristics, including preexisting
attitudes and beliefs that may condition an audience’s willingness
to be influenced.
They are• timed to influence actors before they decide or act, in the
case of leaders and decisionmaking groups, or before attitudes crys-
tallize, in the case of mass audiences.
They make use of messengers with compelling• source characteris-
tics, i.e., those whose professional or technical competence, like-
ability, credibility, trustworthiness or confidence, or high Q score
make them effective spokespersons.
They rely upon messages with• compelling message characteristics,
i.e., those whose content, format, cognitive and emotional appeal,
and other characteristics will most resonate with the audience.
86 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
They• facilitate adaptation by providing timely feedback on effects
so that information channels, messengers, themes, messages, etc.
can be modified to increase their persuasiveness.
Our study suggests that in achieving these desiderata, planners
have available to them a wide range of models and theories that might
be fruitfully employed to plan and design influence operations. The
study furthermore suggests that it is possible for planners to employ
many of these tools in a way that systematically narrows the focus to
those target audiences for which the greatest leverage or payoff can be
found.
Planners also should be mindful, however, of three practical impli-
cations that result from the heterogeneity of the scholarly literature, the
absence of a larger meta-theory of influence, and the situational or con-
text dependence of persuasion efforts at various levels:
The various theories described above can provide only starting1.
points for planners and operators; they will need to be adapted or
fashioned to meet the specific requirements of each situation.
Even after detailed analysis, vast uncertainties are likely to2.
remain regarding the efficacy of various alternative approaches
to communication of messages to target audiences.
The vast uncertainties associated with the enterprise of influence3.
lead to the requirement for an adaptive, robust, metrics-based
planning, execution, and assessment process that can under-
write a capability to plan, test, and assess the results of different
sorts of strategies, communications, and appeals and to modify
the approach based on the results. The requirements of such a
metrics-based process for influence operations are well beyond
the scope of the present effort and are described in some detail
in other, related work (Larson et al., forthcoming).1
1 Appendix D reviews a number of different planning methodologies that may be of inter-
est to planners.
Implications for planners 87
By constructing influence campaigns on solid theoretical and
empirical foundations at the micro and macro levels, and testing and
adapting target audience responses to these efforts, planners are far
more likely to avoid pitfalls and, in some cases, even achieve their influ-
ence objectives.
However, as described in this report, the required level of intel-
lectual and analytic effort for such endeavors can be substantial. The
effort may in many cases not only outstrip the capabilities of planning
staffs, but also may require more intensive inputs and effort than their
results perhaps merit.