A Review of Planning Methodologies for
Influence Operations1
Introduction
The U.S. Army’s extensive involvement in counterinsurgency and
counterterrorism operations in Iraq and Afghanistan has stimulated an
increasing interest in the service in the field of influence operations. In
theaters where operational success is heavily dependent on acquiring a
measure of support from the civilian population, influence operations
can increase the chances of mission success while at the same time
reducing both casualties and the size of the U.S. force required. In this
study, we have defined influence operations as
the integrated and synchronized application of national dip-
lomatic, informational, military, and economic capabilities in
peacetime, crisis, conflict, and postconflict to foster attitudes,
behaviors, or decisions by foreign target audiences that support
U.S. objectives.
If influence operations are to be used by the U.S. Army success-
fully across a range of opponents and contingencies, effective and estab-
lished tools and methodologies will be needed to ensure that influence
operations planning and execution takes into account the campaign’s
1 This appendix was written by Brian Nichiporuk.
156 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
objectives, the enemy’s capabilities, the means available for delivering
messages, and the cultural context. These tools also must anticipate
the possible “cascading consequences” of the various messages sent to a
specific target audience.
This appendix explores the suitability of four planning approaches
for influence operations. We first describe the strategies-to-tasks (STT)
planning approach, which is in wide use within the U.S. Army. Next,
we describe effects-based operations (EBOs), an approach that is cur-
rently the subject of a great deal of interest in the world of joint opera-
tions. We next describe assumption-based planning (ABP), a strategic
planning approach developed at RAND. Next, we present a metrics-
based approach that was developed by RAND in the course of its work
for the Army on IO in Operation Iraqi Freedom that combines ele-
ments of capabilities-based planning (CBP), STT-based planning, and
EBOs into a new methodology that, like EBOs, focuses on outcomes
and that we believe could improve planning and assessment in influ-
ence operations in all phases and levels of war. Finally, we describe
CBP, which does not address military campaign planning, per se, but
can be used for longer-term capability development planning.
STT-Based Planning
STT-based planning is well suited to the Army’s planning processes. It
allows for broad dissemination of a commander’s strategy and objec-
tives, and it directs planners to execute tasks in support of them. The
Army has developed extensive doctrine and distinct capabilities to sup-
port top-down planning and tasking processes of the kind that STT-
based planning requires. Although the Army might prefer an exclusively
STT-based planning cycle, especially for traditional combat operations
defined in terms of fire and maneuver, this top-down approach is not
particularly well suited to influence operations. Such operations must
span various phases of war—peacetime, crisis, major combat, postcon-
flict; and they are often conducted, simultaneously, at multiple levels of
war—strategic, operational, tactical, and technical. STT-based plan-
ning can be improved by making it less rigid and more flexible in envi-
a review of planning Methodologies for Influence Operations 157
sioning or responding to alternative outcomes not originally planned
or intended.
A capabilities-based approach such as that of STT-based plan-
ning, however, falters when systems are asked to accomplish tasks for
which they were not designed. In the context of IO, for example, spe-
cific capabilities are housed in specific disciplines, which tends to limit
the tasking and use of both the capabilities and the disciplines. Take a
look at PSYOP. It is a discipline within the arsenal of IO capabilities.
It is also generally associated with the production and dissemination
of leaflets, but in reality, anyone can print and drop leaflets. Moreover,
other disciplines also “own” specific message-sending capabilities: spe-
cial technical operations, electronic warfare, PA, CA, to name several.
Properly understood and defined, PSYOP’s true “capability” inheres
in the purposeful, informed, even expert crafting of targeted messages
and the selection, among a wide range of media, of the best way to
deliver those messages.
When developing a military plan on the basis of STT planning,
planners seem prone to—i.e., they tend to think in terms of—assign-
ing specific tasks to particular disciplines first and associating capa-
bilities with those disciplines second, rather than thinking in terms of
capabilities per se first, much less combined arms and joint approaches
to achieving overall campaign objectives. In contrast, planners could
be encouraged to focus on overarching capabilities and suites of dis-
ciplines that can work together to achieve commonly desired objec-
tives—e.g., overall campaign objectives. EBOs, for example, are based,
in part, on envisioning specific outcomes that are supposed to result
from achieving such objectives—i.e., on defining intended results in
advance. Hence, they seem well suited to helping planners think from
the outset in terms of outcomes and alternative means of reaching those
outcomes.
Effects-Based Operations
Although both the concept and the terminology of EBOs have been
widely disseminated throughout the Air Force and the joint commu-
158 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
nity, the Army has been less eager to embrace this planning meth-
odology. Comfortable with its existing STT-based approach to plan-
ning, and ever mindful of the unpredictability of the battlefield, the
Army is understandably wary of a process that enthusiasts claim will
resolve all war planning issues for the commander. However, as more
and more organizations began adopting EBO methods and adapt-
ing some EBO concepts to existing planning processes, the Army has
begun to reexamine the approach and investigate its utility in planning
for the employment of various Army capabilities, including for influ-
ence operations. Not much has been written specifically about EBOs
and influence operations, but some work can be found on EBOs and
IO. In addition, more-general documents make it possible to suggest a
potential EBO approach to influence operations.
As demonstrated in Iraq, combat operations do not necessarily
have a definite beginning (e.g., Operation Southern Watch evolved into
what was virtually an all-out air campaign) and a clear-cut end (e.g.,
the continuing insurgency in Iraq). Likewise, peace operations, or other
“noncombat” operations, including transitional or nation-building
operations, require constant reassessment of the effects of simultane-
ous, on-going, and targeted operations on a “battlefield” that includes
civilian and military objectives. EBOs certainly seem to address situ-
ations common to such fluid battlefields—to deal with circumstances
in which commanders operating in an adversary’s environment seek to
achieve multiple objectives by employing a wide array of capabilities. A
process such as EBOs, which are based on intended effects or desired
outcomes, also makes sense for conducting influence operations, which
are conducted in all phases and at all levels of war (from peacetime
through postconflict and from the strategic through the operational
and tactical to the technical levels).
EBOs add an important element to the traditional precombat
planning phase common to STT approaches by associating specif-
ically desired effects or expected outcomes with each of the mili-
tary objectives to be achieved. This approach is somewhat similar to
the development of multiple enemy courses of action in the Army’s
military-decisionmaking planning process. How the EBO approach
differs from military-decisionmaking planning-process treatment of
a review of planning Methodologies for Influence Operations 159
enemy courses of action is in envisioning and prescribing the behavior
that blue forces want red forces to exhibit. For example, if a military
objective seeks to “compel capitulation of enemy forces,” EBOs would
require an expected outcome to be stipulated, such as “40% of enemy
commanders capitulate with their units intact.” EBOs then attempt to
outline the different possible effects needed to reach that stated goal.
Each effect is analyzed against available capabilities and resources;
plans for achieving the effects intended are developed accordingly. So
instead of starting with the objective and assigning tasks to specific
capabilities based on a commander’s understanding of enemy options,
EBOs start with the objective, outline desired enemy behavior, develop
several options for inducing the behavior effects intended, and then
assign suites of resources to accomplish those effects.
Table D.1 seeks to illustrate the EBOs’ basic approach by apply-
ing it to the military objective “defeat or compel capitulation of
enemy forces” in the context of influence operations and information
operations.
The table shows possible main effects for Tier 1 targets and possi-
ble indirect effects for Tier 2 targets. Specific actions and their possible
intended and unintended effects could include the following:
Target: commanders•
Action 1: PSYOP message to commander—surrender by– x time
(or y event) or be attacked
Desired effect: Commander surrenders unitï
Undesired effect: Commander does not surrenderï
Action– 2: Physical attack of commanders, units, logistics, infra-
structure, C2
Desired effect: Commander surrenders unitï
Undesired effects: Commander does not surrender; physicalï
attack causes others to fight
Repeat actions 1 and 2.•
160 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
Table D.1
EBOs and Influence and Information Operations Applied to a Specific
Military Objective: Defeat or Compel Capitulation of Enemy Forces
Tier Targets Targets Capabilities Desired Effects
1. Main effects Commanders pSYOp Commander surrenders
unit
Military units physical attack Individuals surrender
2. Indirect
effects
Command and
control nodes
physical attack attacks on these
targets help convince
commanders and
individuals to
surrender
Intelligence assets pSYOp
Logistics physical attack
Infrastructure physical attack
radio broadcasts Electronic warfare
radio facilities physical attack
nOtE: the capabilities are those needed to produce the desired effect.
Figure D.1 presents the Air Force’s view of the basic principles of
EBOs. Instead of a linear, top-down, planning process, EBOs approach
planning as a continuous, cyclical process of planning, execution, and
assessment.
As for the STT-based approach, the EBO approach calls for pre-
combat planning and planning during operations. Where EBOs differ
from STT-based planning is in their emphasis on outcomes and on
progress during operations, as opposed to STT-based planning’s tradi-
tional practice of conducting postcombat assessments. The following
are the two main drawbacks to EBO planning: (1) many effects are
not easy to anticipate and (2) resources are limited; hence, planners
often have to fall back on those capabilities that happen to be avail-
able. EBOs also require military objectives that are clear, well defined,
and logical; in an uncertain political environment, such objectives can
sometimes prove hard to obtain.
a review of planning Methodologies for Influence Operations 161
Figure D.1
Air Force View of EBOs’ Basic Principles
RAND MG654-D.1
The Effects-Based Approach—Basic Principles
Plan—Employ—Assess
Intelligence/battlespace
awareness feeds the
entire process
Anticipatory assessment
for further planning
• Predictive evaluation
of operations
• “Where are we going?”
• “Where do we need
to go?”
Integrity—Service—Excellence
Evaluation of
outcomes and
progress
• Tactical
• Operational
– JFC
– Component
• Strategic (national)
Planning before operations begin
• Objectives
• Courses of action
• Schemes of maneuver
• Specific effects
• Plans (OPLANs, JAOPs, etc.)
Planning during
operations
• Branch and sequel planning
• Campaign phase transitions
• Strategy redirection
Planning execution
and ongoing battle
rhythm
• AOD, MAAP, ATO
• Execution (unit level)
• Actions and effects
Intelligence/
battlespace
awareness
Planning
Assessment Employment
The main strength of EBOs, however, lie in their assignment of
specifically defined outcomes to particular military objectives. This
emphasis draws planners away from STT-based planning’s more tradi-
tional emphasis on performing tasks and moves them in the direction
of working together to accomplish a shared set of specific goals. Instead
of thinking of influence or information operations from a purely STT
point of view (based on traditional disciplines and their associated
assumptions of effectiveness against particular targets), EBOs turn the
planning process around to focus first on what influences the red force
decisionmaking; then they envision a set of undesirable effects that
red forces are seeking to avoid. Second, EBOs focus on creating an
operational environment through coordinated kinetic and nonkinetic
“events” that will put red forces into the most disadvantageous position
possible. Events are then sequenced to create an “effect.”
For example, blue operations may land forces on the battlefield.
Coordinated with this landing would be an information operations
162 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
campaign announcing the landing, discrediting the leadership, and
offering safe passage to enemy commanders. These messages could also
be sequenced and coordinated with blue force maneuver operations.
Indicators can be developed for use by blue forces, such as “red forces
are leaving their positions,” or “red forces are abandoning arms,” to
help provide evidence that either red forces have accepted conditions
for surrender or they have deserted. Evidence for each indicator can
be analyzed as it is collected. Such evidence provides data for assess-
ing the effectiveness of the actions of blue forces. Assessment involves
a combination of indicators—indicators of performance and indicators
of effectiveness—in addition to an overall assessment of how long it
will take to achieve the military objectives being pursued.
Assumption-Based Planning
Introduction
One tool that has been used for more than a decade in long-range
Army programmatic planning is ABP. 2 Developed at RAND in the
early 1990s, ABP was originally geared toward assisting the Army as
it shaped itself to meet the massive uncertainties in the external envi-
ronment created by the end of the Cold War. Below we discuss if and
how ABP can help the Army to better plan and prepare for influence
operations.
The discussion is organized into four parts. Each part, in sequence,
attempts to answer an important question about ABP and influence
operations. The four questions we will explore are as follows:
What are the basic precepts of ABP?•
Who should use ABP as a planning tool for influence•
operations?
When should ABP be used to support the planning of influence•
operations?
How should ABP be employed to support influence operations?•
2 The basic primer on assumption based planning is Dewar et al., 1993.
a review of planning Methodologies for Influence Operations 163
What Are the Basic Precepts of ABP?
ABP differs from other planning methodologies in that it does not seek
to build a completely new plan for an organization or to develop a set
of future environments with associated probabilities to guide organi-
zational planning. ABP is a high-level tool that tries to help military
organizations make necessary modifications to their existing strate-
gic plan by carefully drawing out, examining, and critiquing the key
assumptions that underlie the strategic plan. If some of these assump-
tions prove to be vulnerable, the plan is modified to take into account
the possibility that some assumptions may fail, which would expose
the organization to external factors for which it is not prepared. ABP
is directed toward “ends-uncertain” planning as opposed to “means-
uncertain” planning. In other words, it is most helpful when redefining
or confirming the goals and objectives of an organization as opposed
to modifying the mechanisms an organization should use to achieve a
set of fixed goals and objectives. Also, ABP is of limited usefulness in
doing planning with unconstrained resources; if an organization wants
to use ABP, it needs to provide some estimate of the resource levels
allocated to each given strategic goal or objective.
The end product of ABP is a modification of the existing strate-
gic plan through the employment of hedging and shaping actions. The
former are actions that seek to buffer the organization against the pros-
pect of failed critical assumptions, while the latter seek to proactively
change the organization or the external environment so that neither is
exposed to vulnerable assumptions about the future.
In specific terms, ABP as a complete process unfolds in five stages
(Dewar et al., 1993, pp. xii–xv). First, the critical assumptions that
underlie an organization’s plans have to be determined and explic-
itly stated. This is not a trivial process: Most complex organizations,
including the Army, do not lay out the assumptions that undergird
their modernization, mission, and campaign plans because so many of
the assumptions are implicitly understood by the senior and middle-
ranking echelons and are not perceived as needing enunciation. Other
assumptions are not stated because most of those in the rest of the orga-
nization are unaware that they support major plans and objectives; no
one takes the time to dig deeply enough to reach those assumptions.
164 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
Second, ABP requires that the analyst identify which of the criti-
cal assumptions are vulnerable. An assumption is deemed to be vul-
nerable if an element of change in the external environment is deemed
to be both significant and working in conflict with the assumption. A
vulnerable assumption is one that, should it fail, would force the orga-
nization to rework itself and its goals. An assumption can be violated
in more than one way.
After the analyst identifies vulnerable assumptions, the third
phase of ABP is the definition of “signposts.” Signposts are indicators
that tell the organization how a vulnerable assumption is faring as time
passes. Is it moving closer to being violated or is it holding up? Sign-
posts need to be written clearly because any element of vagueness in a
signpost could cause an organization to realize too late that the associ-
ated assumption is failing.
The fourth and fifth phases of ABP are dedicated to the formu-
lation of shaping and hedging actions, respectively. As noted earlier,
shaping actions are those designed to proactively influence the envi-
ronment so that an assumption will not fail or, if it does, the organiza-
tion will not be affected by it. In some cases, shaping actions may even
work to cause a vulnerable assumption to fail so that the organization
can minimize uncertainty and rework itself so that this assumption is
removed from its planning. Hedging actions, on the other hand, are
more reactive. They accept that the organization does not have the
power or will to influence the vulnerability of certain assumptions, so
the organization must take action to insulate itself as best as possible to
minimize the impact that an assumption’s failure will have on its goals
and objectives.
Although ABP should ideally unfold in the above sequence, it
does not have to. The creators of ABP allow that only steps 1 and 2
absolutely have to occur in sequence. Steps 3, 4, and 5 may occur in
parallel or in a different sequence if necessary.
Who Should Use ABP As a Planning Tool for Influence Operations?
In the U.S. military, there are many planning staffs and headquarters
involved in every military operation. If influence operations are deter-
mined to be an important part of a prospective or ongoing contin-
a review of planning Methodologies for Influence Operations 165
gency, which level(s) in the military hierarchy should be conducting
the planning for them?
Clearly, since ABP deals with ends-uncertain planning, it is best
employed at the most senior levels of an organization. The middle and
lower echelons of a complex organization are almost always focused
on means-uncertain planning and thus would have great difficulty
in using ABP for their purposes. Thus, when using ABP to test and
modify the Army’s modernization plan, for example, ABP should be
the province of the Army Chief of Staff and his three-star deputies for
operations, intelligence, personnel, etc. However, influence operations
take place in active military theaters, so the set of people who should
lead planning efforts for influence operations is different.
In planning for the use of influence operations in an ongoing
or prospective contingency, the two staffs most appropriate for the
role are likely the Joint Staff’s J-3/J-5 sections and the J-3/J-5 sections
of the unified command responsible for the theater in question (e.g.,
CENTCOM, the Pacific Command, etc.) These two staffs could work
together to use ABP to determine what the desired effects of influence
operations in a given contingency ought to be. Should influence oper-
ations be used merely to increase good will toward American forces
among local civilians or should they be used more aggressively to turn
enemy decisionmakers, military units, or insurgent factions against one
another through the use of disinformation and deception? The Joint
Staff would take the lead in determining what fraction of the U.S. mili-
tary’s global PSYOP, information warfare, and civil affairs resources
should be applied to a given influence operation campaign, while the
unified command planners would take the lead on the specific selection
of target audiences, or “centers of gravity,” (COGs) for the influence
operations campaign. This process would involve intensive interaction
with the intelligence community as well as the J-2 division of the uni-
fied command. The unified command would also work to determine
the regional political implications (good or bad) of a given influence
operations campaign.
ABP for influence operations should not be done at the numbered
army, joint task force, corps, or brigade level. The planners at these
echelons should be focused on determining the means appropriate to
166 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
execute the influence operations plan that has been crafted by the Joint
Staff and the unified command headquarters. These echelons should
focus on such elements as appropriate message delivery mechanisms
and specific message content. If the operational and tactical echelons
of a deployed force start using ABP to prepare influence operations,
the result will be great confusion over goals and objectives, and U.S.
forces will likely find themselves in a situation in which individual
units undertake influence operations that are at cross-purposes with
one another.
When Should ABP Be Used to Support the Planning of Influence
Operations?
Figure D.2 suggests that ABP is most useful at the strategic planning
level. What the figure adds to the discussion is a portrait of which
phases of conflict are most appropriate to the use of ABP for support-
ing influence operations. The figure lays out four phases of a contin-
gency: peacetime, crisis, conflict, and postconflict. As we can see from
the figure, only two of the boxes are filled in as being appropriate for
the use of ABP: peacetime and postconflict.
The reason for this coding is straightforward. ABP is not a short-
time-cycle process; it requires a fair amount of time and thought to
complete an ABP cycle. In fact, the authors of ABP themselves argue
that ABP is more useful the longer the time horizon of the planner is.
ABP is too cumbersome for employment in the crisis action planning
atmosphere that characterizes crisis and major combat (Phases 2 and 3).
In contrast, Phase 1 offers more time in which to deeply reflect on an
existing influence operations plan and pinpoint its vulnerable assump-
tions. During peacetime, analysts working for the relevant high-level
staffs can do interviews and carefully examine the influence opera-
tions parts of existing operational plans (OPLANs) for the purpose of
identifying critical assumptions. They can look for elements of change
a review of planning Methodologies for Influence Operations 167
Figure D.2
Matrix of Levels of Planning Versus Conflict Phases
RAND MG654-D.2
Operational
Levels of
planning
Conflict phases
Tactical
Strategic
PostconflictPeacetime ConflictCrisis
Technical
= ABP relevance
in the given area of operation that would make certain assumptions
vulnerable and interact with intelligence analysts and area specialists
to prepare a list of signposts for the vulnerable assumptions. Finally,
once hedging and shaping actions are developed by analysts in peace-
time, there will be an opportunity to meet with the senior leadership of
the Joint Staff and the unified command to prepare an action plan to
modify the influence operations parts of the main OPLANs. This com-
plete process would likely take at least a few months, time that simply
would not be available in crisis or wartime.
ABP can be used in stability and support operations, but only
under certain conditions. ABP would be suitable to influence opera-
tions at this time only when trends are starting to emerge that indicate
that the postconflict period in a given country is not going as the U.S.
national leadership envisioned. ABP is not necessary if the postconflict
period is proceeding just as planned. ABP would also not be useful if
the unexpected trends have proceeded to the point at which they are
generating a crisis (e.g., a major spike in guerrilla attacks), because at
that point those senior planners who have the authority to make ABP
168 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
work will be distracted and unavailable. For example, to take a con-
crete historical case, ABP would have been useful in support of sta-
bility and support operations in Iraq in the July–October 2003 time
period, when the insurgency was beginning to develop as a persistent
feature of the situation and it became clear that the rank-and-file Iraqi
government bureaucracy had disintegrated and could not be put back
together for the purpose of restoring basic public services. Before July,
it simply would have been too early to see these trends. After October
2003, insurgent violence began reaching a level at which senior plan-
ners at CENTCOM probably became fully absorbed in crisis action
planning and would not have had the time to support a serious ABP
exercise.
In the event that ABP is desired during the sort of situation the
United States faced in Iraq in late 2003, the planning sequence would
have to be done by a special outside cell with full authority from the
Joint Chiefs of Staff to make and implement its hedging and shaping
actions at the unified command in question.
How Should ABP Be Employed to Support Influence Operations?
Now that we have seen which actors should use ABP to support influ-
ence operations during certain conflict phases, we must examine how
ABP should actually be used to support the “nuts and bolts” of influ-
ence operations.
Our research suggests that effective influence operations seem to
share six common elements. They
are aimed at specific desired effects•
are directed against key target audiences•
are mindful of the characteristics of those audiences•
use an effective combination of information channels (i.e., pam-•
phlets, Web sites, satellite TV, billboards, text messaging, etc.)
have compelling message characteristics•
provide timely feedback on effects.•
In our view, ABP would be most useful in modifying the first two
elements in influence operations plans. It may have some limited util-
a review of planning Methodologies for Influence Operations 169
ity in modifying elements three and four and it will have virtually no
ability to provide help with elements five and six.
Since ABP is a tool for modifying strategic influence operations
plans in peacetime and in certain parts of stability and support opera-
tions, it really has to focus on the desired effects and the key macro
audiences to be targeted. After all, ABP is a tool for ends-uncertain
planning, and the last four elements have to do more with the means
of an influence operations campaign than the ends.
As far as effects are concerned, ABP can help to improve an influ-
ence operations plan by uncovering assumptions about desired effects
that are vulnerable and could cause unintended consequences. For
example, if the United States is targeting a multiethnic country that is
effectively ruled by one minority ethnic group, an influence operations
plan may focus on turning key members of the dominant ethnic group
against the current regime by promising them certain positions of polit-
ical power after they help overthrow the current regime. The assump-
tion underlying this plan is that the other ethnic groups in the country
will be quiet and accept this change of regime passively. However, an
ABP cycle may show that the other ethnic groups would be angered by
this U.S. focus on the politically dominant group and would perceive
Washington as being biased against them. Thus, the disenfranchised
ethnic groups might turn against U.S. troops when they enter the
country. ABP could produce a modified influence operations module
that would extend political carrots to leaders of the politically excluded
ethnic groups as well. ABP can show that certain desired effects are
based on narrow thinking that may omit key variables, or even that
certain effects might actually be counterproductive. An example of the
latter case might be a situation in which an influence operations plan
seeks to foment fighting among different units in an enemy’s army.
This plan might have short-term benefits during the combat phase, but
if the result of this plan is the destruction of the enemy army, then there
may be problems in stability and support operations since some parts of
the enemy army might be useful in helping U.S. troops restore order in
the immediate aftermath of the conflict. The complete collapse of the
enemy army might force the United States to keep more troops than
170 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
anticipated in the country during stability and support operations, thus
weakening our ability to respond to other contingencies.
In terms of key target audiences, ABP can help to modify influ-
ence operations plans to take into account the most recent intelligence
information on the political situation in the target country. In opaque
authoritarian regimes, such as those in Iran or North Korea, purges and
shifts in lines of authority are common, with the dictator or the dicta-
tor’s circle constantly seeking to remove any potential threats. These
realignments need to be taken into account when influence operations
planners select key COGs for their OPLAN modules. Not only could
the influence of certain established COGs rise and decline, but some
altogether new COGs could arise in these kinds of political systems.
ABP is a tool that could be helpful in modifying influence operations
plans because these new COGs will probably increase the vulnerability
of certain assumptions in the current influence operations plans. In
semiauthoritarian states, the role of the mass public as a COG could
wax and wane as elections are variously held, cancelled, and/or nulli-
fied over time.
Conclusions
ABP appears to have some potential utility in supporting strategic-level
influence operations, especially during peacetime and stability and sup-
port operations. It is most useful to influence operations when used at
strategic command staff levels during peacetime and “tipping points”
in the postconflict period. It could not support influence operations
planning during crisis or wartime, nor would it be helpful at the opera-
tional or tactical echelons of command. In terms of actual application
to theater influence operations planning, ABP would be most valuable
to the U.S. military if it were focused on modifying those elements of
influence operations that have to do with determining ends as opposed
to means—i.e., determining desired effects and picking the key target
audiences or COGs—that exist in a target state or nonstate actors.
ABP would have little to no value in helping to modify those elements
of an influence operations plan that deal with audience characteristics,
appropriate information channels, correct message characteristics, and
day-to-day feedback.
a review of planning Methodologies for Influence Operations 171
A Metrics-Based Approach to Planning Influence
Operations
In work for the U.S. Army’s Combined Arms Center, RAND devel-
oped a planning approach that builds upon STT-based planning and
EBOs and links the development of influence and information opera-
tions tasks and their assessment to overall military campaign objectives
by developing measures of performance, measures of effectiveness, and
measures for expected outcomes. Larson et al. discuss this topic in a
forthcoming monograph.
Capabilities-Based Planning for Influence Operations
Capability Development
Although it does not address campaign planning, one tool that could
have some relevance in influencing operations capability development
is CBP.3 CBP as a formal methodology gained favor with the Office
of the Secretary of Defense early in the tenure of Defense Secretary
Donald Rumsfeld and has been a strong force in both of the Qua-
drennial Defense Reviews conducted during the Rumsfeld era. The
Secretary and his aides saw CBP as a mechanism that could accelerate
the transformation of the American military into a leaner, more agile,
and more rapidly deployable force in the post-9/11 and post–Operation
Iraqi Freedom security environment. We are seeking to determine if
and how CBP can help the Army to better prepare for and execute
influence operations in a range of diverse future contingencies that
involve conventional, irregular, disruptive, and catastrophic threats.
This section is organized into four parts. Each part, in sequence,
attempts to answer an important question about CBP and influence
operations. The four questions to be investigated are as follows:
What are the basic precepts of CBP?•
3 The basic primer for CBP is Davis, 2002.
172 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
When should CBP be used to support the planning and/or execu-•
tion of influence operations?
Who should use CBP as a planning tool or execution aid for influ-•
ence operations?
How exactly should CBP be employed to support the application•
of influence operations?
What Are the Basic Precepts of CBP?
Unlike the previously examined tool of assumption-based planning,
CBP does not seek to modify an already existing organizational plan.
Instead, it seeks to develop from scratch a set of new, high-priority capa-
bilities that will enable a military organization to meet the demands of
an uncertain security environment by positioning it to perform accept-
ably across a whole portfolio of different plausible scenarios. CBP is
“planning under uncertainty to provide capabilities suitable for a wide
range of modern day challenges and circumstances while working
within an economic framework that necessitates choice” (Davis, 2002,
p. xi).
CBP can be contrasted to the “bounded threat” approach that
dominated Pentagon planning from 1960 until the Bottom Up Review
of the early 1990s. The bounded threat approach set up a single, detailed
scenario with clear assumptions about timelines and the identity of
the enemy (e.g., nearly simultaneous major theater wars with Iraq and
North Korea) and built a force made up of divisions, air wings, and
carrier battle groups to deal with that threat. Other scenarios that
might emerge were treated as lesser included cases that could be dealt
with by subsets of the large force that was developed to handle the
clear, bounded threat scenario. CBP sees this approach as myopic and
obsolete in the environment of the 21st century. Instead of using mili-
tary units as building blocks, CBP employs capability modules. And,
instead of using complete wars as benchmarks for generating forces, it
uses specific operational challenges that could exist within several dif-
ferent conflict scenarios. CBP is based on the principle that the only
thing we know for sure is that we will not be able to predict where our
forces will be deployed next, so it is not fruitful to stake our force pos-
ture on any single scenario, no matter how demanding it may be.
a review of planning Methodologies for Influence Operations 173
CBP as a formal methodology unfolds in three major steps. First,
there is a survey of capability needs. The analyst begins this phase by
positing a wide range of scenarios that the U.S. military might have to
confront in the next 5–15 years. This list could include scenarios such
as the following: “defeat a North Korean invasion of South Korea,”
“use early entry forces to halt an ethnic cleansing campaign in Central
Africa,” or “seize a WMD stockpile from a terrorist group in South
Asia.” There does not seem to be any formalized method for generat-
ing this list nor any upper or lower limit on the number of scenarios
that can be included. One concludes the first phase by developing a
list of capability “outputs” or “modules” that would be needed to give
the U.S. military the capability to perform acceptably across the port-
folio of listed scenarios. Examples of such outputs would be the fol-
lowing: “be able to immediately destroy critical mobile targets with
WMD capability,” “attack and destroy terrorist strongholds,” or “halt
an armored invasion force within 100 km of its jump-off point.” It
is important to note that one major difference between CBP and the
bounded threat approach is the injection of time as a variable into CBP
modules. A number of CBP capability modules are distinguished by
their emphasis on accomplishing a certain task early in a contingency
because it is believed that accomplishing this mission later on would
have only a marginally positive effect on the outcome.
The second formal phase of CBP involves the use of mission-system
analysis to assess the robustness of a variety of capability options across
a given mission. The missions in this case are derived from the capabil-
ity outputs in the previous step. The options are actually descriptions
of system types that could be used to accomplish the mission, such
as forces, weapons, C2, logistics, doctrine, plans, skills, readiness, etc.
(Davis, 2002, p. xix). In order for this part of the analysis to work cor-
rectly, the analyst needs to have good metrics for evaluating mission
success or failure; without such metrics, it will be difficult to assess the
capability options.
Phase 2 of formalized CBP actually evaluates capability options
through the use of exploratory analysis. Ideally, exploratory modeling
tools are used to examine how mission accomplishment is influenced
by a large number of parameters, each of which can be driven by a dif-
174 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
ferent capability option. For example, to use a textbook case, the ability
of a blue force to halt a red force armored invasion before it penetrates
100 km into the territory of a friendly nation could be influenced by
any of the following:
the speed of deployment of blue tactical air forces•
the speed of deployment of blue forces’ command, control, com-•
munications, and computers, intelligence, surveillance, and recon-
naissance packages
the ability of blue forces to keep red forces from advancing at•
more than a certain speed
the rate at which red forces’ armored vehicles can be destroyed.•
A number of other variables can be presented as well for this mis-
sion. New exploratory modeling tools can tell us which of the above
“levers” is most important in halting the invasion. We might find that,
for a certain quality of red forces on desert terrain, the speed of deploy-
ment of blue tactical air forces and the rate of red force attrition domi-
nate all other variables. This result then causes the analyst to weight
the capability options that influence those two parameters very highly
for the part of the scenario portfolio that has to do with conventional
warfare against armored forces.
As one aggregates all the results across the scenario portfolio, one
can generate a set of “panel charts” that show regions of success and
failure for U.S. forces in each mission area. By reviewing the results of
exploratory modeling, the analyst can find those capability options that
do the most to shrink the area of failure in each mission area. Where
the shrinkage is especially dramatic, a capability option can be said to
be truly transformational and worthy of being labeled as a high-value
item. CBP thus has a more systematic way of identifying transforma-
tional capability packages than the old bounded threat approach did.
Phase 3 of CBP attempts to establish funding priorities for the
various capability options that have been tested across the scenario
portfolio, recognizing that the budgetary environment will usually be
constrained and force hard choices to be made among many promising
options. CBP developers have proposed using a weighted scorecard to
a review of planning Methodologies for Influence Operations 175
deal with the resource scarcity problem. All of the capability options
that are funding candidates are listed and then given an effectiveness
score based on their performance over several categories—e.g., major
combat operations, stability and support operations (SASO), deter-
rence, etc. Each of these categories is weighted based on the analysts’
view of their importance in the time frame at hand. The cost in dollars
of purchasing the full capability option is then calculated, and a ratio
of effectiveness per unit cost is produced for each option. The higher
the ratio, the more valuable the given option ought to be. The valid-
ity of these ratios of course is dependent on how accurate the analysts’
weighting factors are.
When Should CBP Be Used to Support the Planning and/or
Execution of Influence Operations?
CBP is mainly useful for planning Army-wide influence operations
capabilities over the long term, say, 5–20 years into the future. It would
have no utility for planning for or helping execute influence operations
use in any specific near- or far-term contingency. In this respect, it dif-
fers from ABP, which does have some utility for individual scenario
planning.
CBP would potentially be useful in supporting Army contribu-
tions to a Quadrennial Defense Review or U.S. Army strategic plan-
ning guidance development exercise. It could lay out a list of desired
influence operations capabilities that the Army would like to have to
cover the scenario space provided to the service by OSD. Streamlined
versions of CBP could also be used to help shape the focus of the influ-
ence operations modules in some of the strategic war games that are
run by TRADOC or the Army War College and in some of the future
technological requirements studies that are done by the Army’s various
analytical organizations. Another possibility is that CBP could be used
to inform influence operations mission area inputs that may be pro-
vided to a regional combatant commander by the Army service com-
ponent command.
176 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
Who Should Use CBP As a Planning Tool or Execution Aid for
Influence Operations?
CBP would be an appropriate long-range influence operations planning
tool for senior programmers and force developers on the Army Staff
who have responsibility for preparing the Army program out beyond
the immediate Program Objective Memorandum cycle. It would seem
that the G-8 division of the Army Staff would be the lead agency in
any effort to use CBP to help determine the influence operations capa-
bility modules required by the service in that time frame. G-8 could
be ably assisted by the G-2 and G-3 directorates of the Army Staff in
any such exercise. G-2 could furnish intelligence estimates on a spec-
trum of future threats that would help G-8 to better understand and
pinpoint the vulnerability, or lack thereof, of those threats to an Ameri-
can use of influence operations. G-3 officers could contribute expertise
on how influence operations might be integrated into more standard
kinetic operations in the distant future. Elements of TRADOC, like
the Futures Center, could also participate in a long-range exercise to
build a cohesive Army IO program.
Because it focuses on longer-term capability development, CBP
would be of no real use to the Army’s operational units in their employ-
ment of influence operations in the context of a campaign. CBP is a
long-range capabilities development tool that does not have relevance
to the challenges faced by operational units, either at their home bases
or in a theater of operations. CBP does not have any real operational
or tactical-level applications. Nevertheless, it may have some utility in
helping the U.S. Army identify ways to improve doctrine, organiza-
tions, training, systems, or other aspects of its Title X train-and-equip
responsibilities, to better prepare the Army for conducting influence
operations.
How Exactly Should CBP Be Employed to Support the Application of
Influence Operations?
As hinted at above, CBP is best suited to develop the Army’s set of
influence operations capabilities beyond the current program objective
memorandum. In this capacity, the tool would have some utility for
the service. However, the effect of CBP on influence operations plan-
a review of planning Methodologies for Influence Operations 177
ning and programming is limited by the fact that the exploratory mod-
eling tools we now have are not very effective in assessing the battlefield
effectiveness of influence operations in the context of a multifaceted
campaign.
Ideally, a comprehensive CBP exercise for the Army would include
a mission area that was titled “Employing Influence Operations to
Weaken Enemy Will,” and Army planners could evaluate a range of
capability options against that mission to determine which parameters
are most significant to mission success across a portfolio of scenarios.
Although influence operations tends to depend heavily on software as
opposed to hardware for successful employment, there are a number of
physical systems for supporting influence operations that would fit well
into standard Army “rack and stack” prioritizing exercises. Items such
as advanced Web site and email dissemination systems, advanced satel-
lite phones and text messaging devices, Internet telephony, and rapidly
deployable, lightweight TV and radio transmitters are all important to
influence operations and could easily be costed out over time by Army
programmers. Advanced databases for gathering and fusing cultural
intelligence and computerized SNA tools also represent a capability set
that the Army could procure.
The problem, as noted above, will lie in the use of exploratory
modeling tools to determine the effectiveness of influence operations
across a portfolio of scenarios, both conventional and irregular in nature.
Metrics for success in influence operations are often difficult to express
in the form of a simple number, trend, or ratio that can be produced
readily by our available modeling tools. The inability of current combat
models to clearly describe and evaluate the effect of different influence
operations hardware is certainly a long pole in the tent that limits the
utility of CBP. Some newer models that have been developed more for
SASO than for conventional combat, such as the United Kingdom’s
Diplomatic and Military Operations in Non-Warfighting Domain
(Diamond) model (see Bailey, 2001), are beginning to come to grips
with the influence operations area, but they are still in the formative
phase. Thus, the exploratory modeling exercise that lies at the heart of
CBP is problematic for the application of influence operations. In order
to be run through CBP completely, an influence operations module
178 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
will have to be subject to a considerable amount of expert opinion and
subjective judgment. Perhaps lessons from influence operations in pre-
vious campaigns could be used to inform this kind of expert opinion.
Finally, when it comes to assessing the cost-effectiveness of differ-
ent influence operations systems in the final phase of CBP, much will
depend on the weight analysts accord to different types of contingen-
cies when evaluating candidate future influence operations systems. If
a high weight is accorded to standard major combat operations and a
lower weight to SASO or irregular contingencies, it may be very difficult
for most influence operations systems to achieve an effectiveness/cost
ratio that could be regarded as having “transformational” potential.