Influencing adversary Leadership Coalitions 45
appropriate strategy. 3 In other cases—perhaps especially those involv-
ing intrastate conflicts or nonstate actors—an indirect strategy may be
more appropriate. Such indirect strategies can include the following:
Intercession by an influential third party.• Historical examples
include the Bush administration’s effort to enlist Russian help in
convincing Saddam Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait in 1991
and more recent efforts to enlist Russian, Japanese, and especially
Chinese assistance in the six-party talks with North Korea over
Pyongyang’s nuclear weapons programs.
Strengthening the hand of moderates or weakening the hand of•
hard-liners. The relative influence of moderates and hard-liners
in adversary decisionmaking may be susceptible to manipula-
tion through a carefully crafted influence strategy that combines
precisely targeted messages with appropriately discriminate con-
cessions and/or threats. Good examples of this strategy are U.S.
efforts to encourage moderate forces at the expense of extremists
in Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan, Indonesia, the West Bank, and Gaza.
Encouraging important constituents of the opposing regime to put pres-•
sure on their leaders. It may be possible to craft influence strategies
that increase the pressure that leaders feel from their core con-
stituencies. During the war in Kosovo, for example, the NATO
coalition reportedly placed at risk various commercial enterprises
in Belgrade that were owned by core supporters of Slobodan
Milosevic, and this pressure may have contributed to Milosevic’s
decision to capitulate (see Hosmer, 2001).
The literature on strategies for influencing adversaries leads to a
very similar set of conclusions about context dependence seen in many
other areas of influence, including the need to understand actor-specific,
group decisionmaking and other situational factors. For example, as
3 Such direct strategies can include classic deterrence and coercive diplomacy directed
against adversary leaders and may be accompanied by either threats or positive inducements
or both.
46 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
George (2002, p. 274) describes the role of carrots in deterrence and
coercive diplomacy:
It must be emphasized that offering positive incentives to an
adversary as well as threats is highly context dependent in both
deterrence and coercive diplomacy. There can be no assurance that
a combination of carrot and stick will be effective. The outcome
depends on many characteristics of the two actors, the nature of
the conflict between them, how well carrots and sticks are chosen
and employed, and situational variables. For example, if impor-
tant divisions exist in the leadership group of the adversary, a
carrot and stick approach may encourage those leaders who favor
some kind of settlement. When important domestic constituents
of the leadership of the adversary state favor termination of the
crisis, their views and actions may become more influential on
decisions if their state is offered carrots as well as sticks.
As a result, George has frequently cited the need for general
models of influence that can be used as diagnostic tools to account for
actor-specific, situational, and other factors.
The implication for planners is that an exceedingly rich body of
research is available that offers a diagnostic and prescriptive framework
for informing the analysis and planning of influence operations. But
these general models need to be adapted to the specific characteris-
tics of each new influence effort as a result of differences in objectives,
adversaries, and other characteristics of the situation.
Agent-Based Rational Choice Models
To be sure, outcomes in political-military contests are the result of con-
flicts and bargaining between the disputants (e.g., the United States
and an adversary), but they also are greatly influenced by domestic fac-
Influencing adversary Leadership Coalitions 47
tions or coalitions that have some influence on adversary leaders or by
third parties, such as international or transnational actors. 4
The use of agent-based rational choice or expected utility
models can illuminate the underlying interest group relationships and
dynamics—bargaining, coercion, coalition-building, and so on—that
influence adversary decisionmaking. These models also can bound the
range of likely outcomes for a policy dispute, identify key stakeholder
groups that may offer leverage, and assist in choosing strategies that are
most likely to influence the outcomes of political deliberations in ways
that favor U.S. aims.
Of the various social science approaches we reviewed, agent-based
rational choice or expected utility modeling (EUM) appeared to be
the most mature and robust. We believe that one of those approaches
should be employed in the development of influence strategies; our
judgment is that it is a proven forecasting technique that is suitable for
operational use for influence strategy development.
The expected utility model of principal interest originally was
developed by political scientist Bueno de Mesquita in the late 1970s
and early 1980s.5 A commercial version of the model, called Policon,
was marketed through Data Resources Incorporated and used by the
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) from 1982 to 1986, and an in-house
CIA version of the model, called FACTIONS, subsequently was devel-
oped by the Directorate of Science and Technology’s Office of Research
and Development (Feder, 1995, p. 274). Some academic versions of the
4 During the war in Kosovo, for example, Milosevic appears to have been under tremen-
dous pressure from his core supporters to take actions that would end the bombing cam-
paign, which was destroying a key source of their economic wealth. See Hosmer, 2001.
5 The model was adapted to two main applications: international conflict and political
forecasting. Regarding applications for interstate conflict, see for example, Bueno de Mes-
quita, 1980, 1981, 1985, and 2000; Bueno de Mesquita and Lalman, 1992. On applica-
tions for coalition politics, see Bueno de Mesquita, 1984; Bueno de Mesquita, Newman, and
Rabushka, 1985, 1996; Bueno de Mesquita and Stokman, 1994.
48 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
model also are available, 6 and several commercial ventures currently
market the tool as part of their consultancies.7
The input data required by the model are readily specified by sub-
ject matter experts:
Identification of the key political stakeholder groups within or•
outside the country who may seek to influence the policy
A specified range of policy alternatives that encompass key stake-•
holder groups’ preferred outcomes 8
The policy preference on the issue of each group•
Estimates of the relative political, economic, or military capa-•
bilities that each group may employ to influence the policy
decision
Estimates of the importance (salience) each group attaches to the•
issue, signifying the group’s willingness to expend political capital
to influence policy outcomes (Bueno de Mesquita, 1984).9
The model endogenously calculates each stakeholder group’s (1)
risk orientation, (2) basic orientation toward other actors, and (3) esti-
6 Congressional Quarterly Press (as of December 2007: www.cqpress.com) has a Web-
based online version that is available to instructors and students using Bueno de Mesquita’s
textbook on international politics. Also, a version of the model, called EUGene (Expected
Utility Generation and Data Management Program) and developed by D. Scott Bennett and
Allan C. Stam III, is available online (as of December 2007: www.eugenesoftware.org) for
the analysis of datasets dealing with international conflict and cooperation.
7 Different commercial versions of the model are in use or marketed by Decision Insights,
Inc. (formerly Policon), Policy Futures LLP, and the Sentia Group. Sentia Group’s Senturion
model is described in Abdollahian et al., 2006.
8 The model assumes that issues are unidimensional, such that preferences can be rep-
resented on a line segment, and that preferences are single-peaked, so that the associated
utilities for potential outcomes diminish steadily the farther in Euclidean distance a possible
settlement is from a player’s preferred outcome. Each actor’s risk orientation is estimated
endogenously from his or her position relative to the predicted outcome, such that actors may
perceive the same situation very differently.
9 An actor’s salience, which can range between 0 and 1, discounts the actor’s capabilities.
For example, an actor whose capabilities are judged to be 100 and whose salience is 1.0 has
an effective capability on the issue of 100, whereas an actor whose capabilities are 100 but
whose salience is only 0.5 has an effective capability on the issue of 50.
Influencing adversary Leadership Coalitions 49
mates of potential gains or losses in utility from alternative bargains
that might be struck with other actors. Finally, it calculates what pro-
posals will be offered and accepted.10
The intellectual foundations of expected utility models are found
in theoretical work on social choice, spatial voting, and game theo-
ry.11 In their typical contemporary form, expected utility models really
consist of two distinct models: first, a weighted spatial voting model
forecasts an outcome using whatever voting rule has been specified;12
second, the model simulates the actual bargaining between actors or
groups that are seeking to influence the outcome of the policy issue
leading to the predicted outcome.13 Thus, using a small number of
inputs—only three estimates per stakeholder group—the model fore-
casts an outcome on the policy issue and simulates the interactions
between actors—including bargaining and threats—that are expected
to be part of the process that will lead to that outcome. Given a base
forecast, planners can then explore policy changes—changes in a
U.S. position or salience, for example, or in another actor’s position or
salience—that can shift the political outcome in favorable ways.
10 Actors are assumed to trade off political security and policy gains, with the model infer-
ring each actor’s risk orientation—risk acceptance or aversion—from his or her position rela-
tive to the forecast outcome. Risk aversion is deemed to increase the closer the actor is to the
forecast outcome, while risk acceptance is deemed to increase the farther the actor is from
the forecast outcome.
11 Among the foundations are Black’s (1958) median voter theorem, Riker’s (1962) work
on political coalitions, and Banks’ (1990) theorem about the monotonicity between certain
expectations and the escalation of political disputes.
12 Most commonly, this is the Condorcet winner, which occupies the median voter position
and in which actors are weighted by their effective political power, but it also can take the
form of qualified majority voting, majority voting with veto, or other voting rules.
13 Although the specifics sometimes vary somewhat because of the evolution of the model,
descriptions of the logical foundations and underlying equations of expected utility models
can be found in Bueno de Mesquita, 1997, 2000; Bueno de Mesquita, Newman, and
Rabushka, 1985, 1996; Bueno de Mesquita and Stokman, 1994, pp. 71–104; Kugler, Abdol-
lahian, and Tammen, Technical Appendix, n.d.
50 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
EUM has been used extensively within the U.S. intelligence com-
munity14 and by academic scholars to forecast political outcomes on
various policy issues, and it has developed an impressive track record
in accurately predicting political outcomes. Although many readers are
likely to remain skeptical of the claims that follow, a number of differ-
ent sources have reported a high level of accuracy for forecasts using
this approach:
Bueno de Mesquita (1984, p. 233) reported that “around 90 per-•
cent of the real-time forecasts based on this model have proven
correct both with respect to the predicted policy decisions and
with the circumstances surrounding those decisions.”
Feder (2002) reported that, during his career at the CIA, he used•
the model on more than 1,200 issues dealing with more than 75
countries and that, in a sample of 80 issues involving more than
a score of countries, the voting model alone was accurate almost
90 percent of the time; as an example, he reported that a 1993
analysis of the likely Italian budget deficit forecast a deficit of
70 trillion lira, within 1 percent of the deficit that ultimately was
approved by the Italian government (Feder, 1995).
Feder (1995, p. 118) cites Organski and Eldersveld’s (1994) evalu-•
ation of real-time forecasts on 21 policy decisions in the European
community, in which the authors concluded that “the probabil-
ity that the predicted outcome was what indeed occurred was an
astounding 97 percent.”
More recently, in the fall of 2002, Kugler and his associates con-•
ducted an EUM-based analysis of the imminent war between the
United States and Iraq. This analysis predicted a U.S. victory and
the collapse of Hussein’s regime, but also forecast a prolonged
insurgency largely centered around former regime elements and
other disaffected Sunnis; an updated analysis immediately after
the conclusion of combat operations forecast the break between
14 Stanley Feder (1995) reports that the version of the expected utility model in use within
the CIA’s Directorate of Intelligence has been used in well over 1,000 policy issues of interest
to the Directorate of Intelligence.
Influencing adversary Leadership Coalitions 51
Ahmed Chalabi, a U.S. protégé, and the U.S. government, among
other developments (see Efird and Kugler, 2002; Kugler and
Tammen, 2003; Baranick et al., 2004).15
Agent-based rational choice or expected utility model–based
analyses appear to offer a unique set of capabilities for illuminating the
influence of various stakeholders who might be targeted for influence
operations, for simulating forecasts of the political outcomes under dif-
ferent circumstances and policies, for suggesting the political dynam-
ics that will lead to forecast political outcomes, and for identifying the
sorts of policy changes—and level of resources—that are needed to
influence outcomes in favorable ways. These capabilities are all essential
for effective influence operations.
Influencing Adversary Leadership Coalitions: Conclusions
This chapter has provided an overview of work that addresses strategies
for influencing adversaries and, taken as a whole, provides a rich set
of diagnostic tools for assessing the likely efficacy of alternative influ-
ence strategies. We also discussed agent-based rational choice models,
whose capabilities and predictive track record suggest that they have an
important role to play in the exploration and development of alterna-
tive influence strategies for achieving U.S. objectives.
Before concluding the chapter, we highlight several other features
that appear to be somewhat distinctive to influence operations against
adversary leadership coalitions and that need to be emphasized:
Political outcomes result not just from statements that are made•
by participants in policy debates, but also through the negotia-
tion, policy concessions, horse-trading, bullying, coalition for-
mation, and other essentially political activities that typically are
conducted, whether in public or in the proverbial smoke-filled
15 One of the present authors (Larson) provided expert data on Iraqi stakeholder groups that
were used in EUM simulations and analyses.
52 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
room. Understanding and seeking to influence these dynamics
are key elements of strategic-level influence operations against
adversaries.
Not all participants or stakeholder groups involved in a debate•
are equally important to the resolution of that debate. Partici-
pants may differ in the political capital they have available. For
example, some actors (or their coalitions) will be quite influen-
tial, while others are quite marginal. Given the likely constraints
on resources available for influence operations, identifying which
stakeholders matter and which do not is critical.
Finally, each stakeholder group’s objectives, stakes in the outcome,•
risk orientations, decisionmaking style, preferred strategies, and
other factors may differ. Therefore, it frequently is necessary to
“tune” influence strategies to specific individuals and stakeholder
groups.
Having illuminated analytic approaches for identifying which
stakeholder groups are key, in the next chapter, we turn to the chal-
lenges of influencing large numbers of these groups