appEndIx a
Case Study of Influence in Advertising and
Marketing1
Introduction
A 2004 study of advertising spending (Maddox, 2004, p. 23) pro-
jected that U.S. businesses would spend $278 billion on advertising in
2006, with an expected direct sales impact of $2.3 trillion. This reli-
ance on advertising to sell goods and services in the United States fuels
a rich literature on how to develop and market products and services
that people will buy. The lessons learned from advertising have been
adapted to benefit a variety of other fields, including nonprofit fund-
raising and creating social change, and are also useful in the area of
influence operations.
A substantial part of influence operations is convincing individu-
als or communities that a certain action (or inaction) is in their best
interest. Influence operations may be used to dissuade an enemy from
fighting in favor of capitulating; to inform civilians how to stay out of
the fray and away from danger; or, after the war is over, to persuade
locals to support the rebuilding effort, push for democracy, and to take
charge of their own safety. In each case, the U.S. government is seek-
ing to persuade or compel local forces, officials, or civilians to adopt a
belief that they might not otherwise hold or to engage in behaviors that
they might not otherwise engage in. In some respects, these efforts are
much like traditional marketing, in which the producer uses specific
1 This appendix was authored by Amy Richardson.
90 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
tools to convince the consumer to purchase a product at a certain price.
In this appendix, we address how lessons learned in marketing goods
and services may be applied to the work of influence operations. 2
A number of relevant commercial analogues exist to the introduc-
tion of influence operations in a new theater. A single example will be
used to illustrate the point.
A U.S. influence operations campaign might be like the launch of
a new line of products that fall under a single brand. For example, imag-
ine that the Coca-Cola Company is introducing a new brand of coffee
drinks, which include a variety of flavors. The Coca-Cola Company is
well known, but the brand it develops may or may not be, depending
on whether the link to the parent company is emphasized. The com-
pany must develop anew all the brand elements—the name, the line of
products, the packaging, the key messages for why this brand is better
than the competitors—and ultimately, the advertising.
In the domain of influence operations, the U.S. name typically is
well known, and it may elicit either positive or negative associations in
different target audiences that may facilitate or hinder the acceptance
of U.S. messages, and these associations may themselves be very dif-
ficult to change. 3 Other facets of influence operations efforts may not
be fully formed, however. For example, the overarching goals and mes-
sages of the influence operations efforts that form the brand identity—
democracy, freedom, economic empowerment, safety—are all viable
candidates for status as the one primary message that influence opera-
tions may choose to promote. In a similar vein, the specific actions
that influence operations take to support an overall message (capitulate
versus fight, not support the insurgency, join the local police force)
may be likened to the individual elements of the brand line of prod-
ucts. These individual items may be targeted to different audiences and
2 For a comparable effort in this vein, see Helmus, Paul, and Glenn, 2007.
3 In the worst case, influence operations may most closely approximate crisis communica-
tion efforts of commercial firms. For example, U.S. efforts to recover from scandals such as
those at Abu Ghraib or incidents involving civilian deaths may share some characteristics of
Dow Chemical’s response to the Bhopal tragedy or accounting firm responses to accounting
scandals. We would like to thank RAND colleague Jeff Marquis for this point.
Case Study of Influence in advertising and Marketing 91
might have somewhat different benefits, but all support the central
message of the brand.
While there are enough similarities between marketing and influ-
ence operations to believe that they share some best practices, there
are many and large differences. Marketing is, for the most part, about
selling goods and services, while influence operations are about selling
ideas; marketing is typically conducted in a positive or neutral environ-
ment, while influence operations frequently take place in a hostile set-
ting and face a highly skeptical or disapproving target audience; mar-
keting efforts are generally given enormous latitude to make decisions
about the brand, the product, the advertising, and the market, while
for influence operations, many of these decisions have already been
made; and marketing done poorly has implications for the brand and
company, while influence operations done poorly can result in the loss
of life for coalition or enemy forces and for civilians.
Despite these differences, however, the central goal in marketing
and influence operations—to influence decisionmaking—is the same,
and marketing tools are suitable for both fields. The purpose of this
appendix is to describe those tools and to examine how they might
be used to the advantage of influence operations. First, this appendix
takes a detailed look at how a typical brand is developed and mar-
keted, focusing particularly on the research that supports each step.
Second, it explores how similar research might be conducted for an
influence operations campaign. Third, it considers other cases in which
traditional marketing tools have been adapted for nontraditional fields
and what lessons we can learn from these cases for influence opera-
tions. Fourth, it looks at what expectations we can have from market-
ing efforts both in their traditional and nontraditional forms and some
of the common pitfalls of marketing that can handicap those efforts.
Finally, it concludes with a discussion of the advantages and impedi-
ments to developing a marketing campaign that are specific to influ-
ence operations. While significant, these impediments do not stand in
the way of a well-run influence operations campaign, and they may be
reduced over time.
92 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
Building a Brand
There is a very systematic process that many businesses follow in devel-
oping a new brand. Of course, few individual efforts will follow all
of these steps exactly, but together they form the outline for a typical
launch of a new line of products.
First, the members of a brand team will develop the specific brand.
To do this, they will
identify• needs in the market that are not met by the products
currently offered
identify• products that can best fill those needs
identify and understand the• target consumers for the new line of
products
develop possible• concepts for the brand 4
test• those concepts to identify the one with the greatest profit
potential.
The brand team members will then develop the advertising. To
do this, they will
develop a variety of• advertising campaigns and a marketing plan
to support the product launch
test• those campaigns to determine the one that is most consistent
with the brand and target audience.
If the brand is expected to be sufficiently profitable, the brand
team members will then
launch• the product
evaluate• its performance.
4 Here a concept refers to all the information connected to a product or service—the name,
product, logo, personality, tagline, claims, and all other elements that together form a certain
set of expectations that will be associated with the brand.
Case Study of Influence in advertising and Marketing 93
For most of these steps, research can provide invaluable guidance.
Below we describe each of these steps in greater detail and the research
that may be used to support them.
Brand Development
Identifying Unmet Needs. The first step in developing a new
product line is to understand what is out there and what needs are not
being met by current products. A brand will surely fail if it is does not
fill an unmet need.
Ethnographic Research. Formally, ethnographic research focuses
on the study and systematic recording of human cultures. In market-
ing, ethnographic research is used to understand how people incor-
porate products into their lives, how they think about the products in
the context of their lives, their homes, their family, etc. This research
typically involves observation of individuals in their own environment,
rather than a research facility, in the context of where and when they
would be using a specific product (at home in the morning for break-
fast cereal, perhaps midday at the office for nicotine replacement prod-
ucts). Ethnographic research is ideal at the early stage of brand devel-
opment, particularly for categories that elicit emotional responses from
the consumer, such as baby shoes, photo albums, even shampoo and
herbal supplements, for which the researcher can observe and explore
those emotional triggers. This research is also well suited to cases for
which a brand team is trying to build a better “mousetrap.” For exam-
ple, Energizer used ethnographic research to identify unmet needs in
the market for hearing aid batteries by watching the difficulties that
hearing aid users faced in changing their batteries. With this input as
the basis for developing a new product, it launched EZ Change, which
quickly rose to become the leading product in the category (Johnson,
2004).
Focus Groups. Focus groups are small group discussions led by a
trained moderator. They are a staple of marketing research and can be
very useful in helping identify unmet consumer needs. These focused
discussions may include brainstorming about new products and dis-
cussions about what consumers like and dislike about current offer-
ings. The discussions are typically conducted with respondents who fit
94 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
the target audience (broadly defined) for the product. Moderators will
often use projective techniques to encourage respondents to approach
the topic in new ways. For example, a moderator might ask respon-
dents: if this condition (e.g., heartburn, sleeplessness) were an animal,
what animal would it be? if this product lived somewhere, where would
it live? what are some similarities and differences between this product
and a car? These techniques can help identify what people like and do
not like about the current offerings and what needs they have that are
not currently being filled.
Need-Gap Analysis. This type of analysis is quantitative research
to identify the unmet needs that exist in the marketplace within a spe-
cific category of products. For this research, the brand team members
develop a list of “needs”—problems that a consumer might like to have
solved or wants that a consumer might like to have filled by prod-
ucts in the category—using the research described above and input
from others involved with the brand. Then, a random sample of people
are asked (1) how important it is that a product in the category fills
those needs (e.g., that a sleep aid is “not habit forming,” that a cereal
“stays crunchy”) and (2) whether products currently in the category
meet those needs. The responses are then examined to identify areas in
which there is an important, but unmet, need. (For more information,
see Kotler, 1991, p. 319.)
Identifying the Product. After the members of the brand team
have identified the need they intend to fill, they must identify a prod-
uct to fill that need that is acceptable to the consumer.
Product testing is done among a random sample of people to ensure
that consumers perceive it to work and have no major complaints about
it. For this research, a random sample of people who express an interest
in buying the product (or who have the need the brand team is trying
to fill) is recruited to try or use the product. Depending on the nature
of the product, respondents may try the product immediately, or they
may take it home with them and are then called later to gauge satis-
faction. This testing is not designed to detect efficacy of the product
(which requires clinical trials), but simply consumer perceptions of the
product’s strengths and weaknesses.
Case Study of Influence in advertising and Marketing 95
Identifying and Understanding the Target. The brand team
members must also narrow the scope of their target so that they may
tailor the brand image and the advertising to reach that target. Once
the target is identified, the brand team members must then develop a
very clear and rich picture of that target.
Survey. Simple survey techniques may be used to identify those
who are most likely to use the product. For this research, a national
random sample of people is contacted to determine whether they have
the need that the product intends to fill and how satisfied they are with
products that are currently available (those who perceive an unmet
need are likely to be the primary target). Additional questions on the
survey also help the brand team develop a profile of the target mem-
bers’ demographics (sex, age, race, income, education, geographic loca-
tion), consumption habits (where they shop, how often, whether they
currently use products in the category, how often, how much, which
ones), media habits (what they read, listen to, and watch), and other
aspects of their character (whether they are information seekers, early
adopters, new homeowners, etc.).
Focus Groups. Focused group discussions (as described above)
among target consumers are useful to understand how people who
might use the product think about the category, how they might use
the product, how they shop for it, etc.
Developing Concepts for the Brand. The brand team members
will then need to determine the brand positioning—how they intend
to talk about the brand (e.g., fast-acting, rich-tasting, a good value,
etc). In doing so, the brand team members will want to develop mul-
tiple strategies, or possibilities, from which they can choose the most
promising. The various brand elements (positioning, packaging, target,
etc,) together are called the concept. Concepts may vary by the prom-
ises that brands make, the targets they are trying to reach, the names
of the brands, the offerings in the line, the price, the packaging, and
many other ways.
Focus Groups. Focus groups are also useful here to generate ideas
about how to develop or refine the concept. For this research, respon-
dents are chosen from the target population and, depending on the
point at which the research is conducted, invited to think about the
96 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
product in particular. Many of the same projective techniques used
earlier are useful here, but the emphasis here is not on unmet needs but
rather ideal positioning of the product.
Conjoint Analysis. Quantitative input is also very helpful at this
critical point of brand development. Conjoint analysis is an experimen-
tal design used to measure the trade-offs that people make in choosing
products by measuring the utility of each potential brand attribute.
With conjoint analysis, respondents are shown different combinations
of brand attributes (for a car, for example: color, price, size, power, fuel
efficiency, and model style) and asked about their interest in purchasing
the “product” defined by each combination. For example, a respondent
might be asked how likely they would be to purchase a red, four-door,
hybrid car for $25,000, then how likely they would be to purchase a
yellow, seven-seat, SUV for $30,000. The combinations are developed
using an experimental design. Responses to each of the combinations
are then analyzed to develop an understanding both of the impor-
tance of each type of attribute (color versus style) and of the preferred
description within each attribute (red versus green). The brand team
can use this information to develop various concepts that are likely to
appeal to consumers.
Testing Concepts. Once the brand team and advertising agency
together have developed a number of brand concepts, those concepts
are tested among those in the target audience.
Focus Groups. Here, focus groups are useful to understand why
certain concepts most resonate with consumers. For example, focus
groups can help identify specific elements of each concept that engage,
distract, confuse, or annoy the consumer. For this research, respon-
dents are shown the various concepts and asked their reactions to the
overall concept and to the specific language and graphics (which one
they like best and why, whether they found anything confusing, unbe-
lievable, etc.).
Survey. A survey can also be useful to identify which concepts
are most likely to attract consumers and lead them to buy the product.
Here respondents are shown concepts and asked how likely they would
be to purchase the product and are asked related questions.
Case Study of Influence in advertising and Marketing 97
Volumetric Forecasting. The best research at this stage, however,
is quantitative research that includes volumetric forecasting, which com-
bines survey data, marketing plan data, and modeling to produce esti-
mates for unit and dollar sales in the first year of the product launch.
The benefit of this form of research over survey research alone is that
it distinguishes those products that are broadly but weakly liked from
those that appeal to a smaller group but that are so well liked among
them that their purchases will more than make up for the relatively
smaller size of the group. Here the emphasis is on which concept will
generate the greatest sales volume.
For this research, different samples of respondents are shown
the different concepts under consideration and asked a series of stan-
dard questions: For example, How likely would you be to purchase
this product? How much do you think you would like this product?
Do you think it is a good value for the money? What size unit would
you buy when you bought it the first time? Their responses and the
strength of those responses (very, somewhat, etc.) are recorded. These
responses are then transformed using demographic information about
the respondent into a truer measure of their intent to purchase (older
people, for example, typically overstate their willingness to buy a prod-
uct by more than their younger counterparts do). The adjusted data are
then combined with marketing plan information (advertising plans,
distribution plans) to generate an estimate of sales for each concept in
the first year.
Advertising Development
After the concept and all brand elements have been determined, the
advertising agency, with input from the brand team, must develop
multiple ad campaigns consistent with that brand. This step uses previ-
ous research but requires additional research.
Testing Advertising Campaigns
Once a variety of advertising campaigns have been designed, they must
be tested for their ability to persuade someone to buy the product and
to communicate the brand image in a way that is consistent with the
strategy.
98 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
Focus Groups. Focus groups may be used here to understand
what appeals to consumers about the various campaigns and possibly
to give the advertisers ideas for how to improve the campaigns. In these
groups, respondents are chosen from the target audience and shown
print, radio, or TV ads (or storyboards and rough versions of the TV
ads) and asked about the ads and the brand as conveyed by the ad.
Eye Tracking (for Print and Radio). Eye-tracking is a methodology
in which the ad is embedded into its natural context and evaluated
for its ability to engage the reader (or listener). For print, respondents
are told they are evaluating a new magazine. Their eye movements are
tracked (with a camera embedded into a reading light) as they flip
through the magazine and then they are asked a number of questions
about the magazine and the ads. Next they are then shown the specific
ad (forced exposure), and their eye movements are tracked as they look
at the ad to see what they read and notice on the page. They are then
asked another series of questions about the ad. For radio, they are told
they are evaluating highway signs and that the radio is on to make
the situation more realistic. The ad is evaluated for whether someone
changes the channel while the ad is on, and respondents are asked
a series of recall questions afterwards. As with print, they are again
exposed to the ad specifically and asked questions about it. This meth-
odology helps the advertisers understand first whether the ad catches
the readers’ or listeners’ attention and then whether they read through
the ad in the way the brand team and agency hope.
Persuasion Testing (for TV). Persuasion testing is useful to identify
quantitatively whether the ad will generate a trial of the product. The
methodology is similar to that for print and radio testing. A random
sample of respondents is shown what they are told is a pilot TV show.
To make the experience more realistic, they are told, ads are embedded
in the show. Before and after the show respondents are asked about their
preference for products in different categories, including the brand of
interest among the other products in the category. Ads are evaluated by
their ability to generate incremental preference for the product.
Case Study of Influence in advertising and Marketing 99
Developing the Marketing Plan
In addition to refining the advertising campaign, at this point the mar-
keting plan is developed, including the kinds and levels of advertis-
ing, the promotions, the distribution, etc. This plan is developed using
previously conducted research on the target audience and brand and
within constraints of the budget and other factors to develop an opti-
mal marketing plan. This step requires no new research.
Launch and Tracking
Executing the Marketing Plan. The marketing plan is then exe-
cuted. This requires no new research.
Evaluating Performance. Just before and soon after the brand has
launched, the brand team will develop estimates for performance for
the brand in the first year.
Volumetric Forecasting (Before Launch). Volumetric forecast-
ing just before launch is useful to develop the most accurate estimates
of brand volume once the entire marketing plan and advertising have
been finalized. These estimates may also be used to make a go/no go
decision, to influence expectations for the brand, and to help in com-
munications with retailers and in public relations materials. The meth-
odology used here is the same as before, except that respondents are
given the product to try and then asked how likely they would be to
buy the product after trying it (they may also be given the product in
earlier tests, but they certainly will at this point). Respondents who say
they are interested in buying the product are then given it to take home
and called back two weeks later to gauge their reaction.
Test Marketing. Sometimes before a product is launched nation-
ally, it will be tested in a few cities. This research is useful to forecast
sales for a national launch in a more real-world setting and to do a
dry run for all of the elements of the entire brand team (marketing,
sales, production, distribution, etc.). For a test market, the brand com-
pany chooses four cities that are similar to each other and the United
States demographically. Two cities are chosen to be the test markets
and two the control markets (two of each are chosen in case something
unexpected happens in one). The brand is distributed in the two test
markets as it would be nationally and advertised as it would be nation-
100 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
ally. Sales are tracked, and typically surveys are conducted to monitor
awareness of the brand, consideration of it, purchase of it, repeat pur-
chase, and attitudes about the brand. Forecasts may then be made for
a national launch.
Awareness and Attitude Tracking (After Launch). After a
national launch, periodic surveys are conducted to evaluate true con-
sumer response to the brand, to track the key steps to purchase and
repeat (awareness of the brand, consideration, preference, purchase,
and repeat), and to get a sense of who is buying the product and why,
who among the target is not buying it and why, what people remem-
ber, if anything, from the advertising, etc. For this research, a national
random sample is contacted and asked a series of questions about the
brand and category. The first wave of this research must be conducted
before the brand is introduced to establish a benchmark.
Sales Tracking (After Launch). If a company does nothing else, it
will track sales, promotions, and distribution of the brand throughout
the country after launch. This research measures actual sales of the
brand, price paid, whether the product was on the shelves, etc. For this
research, data are collected from most of the major (and many minor)
retailers, including grocery stores, drug stores, mass merchandisers, and
convenience stores and supplemented with in-store checks on distribu-
tion and store promotions. The brand team then analyzes the research
for information about which stores are selling a disproportionate share
of the product and why, which promotions appear to be most effective,
whether there are any problems with distribution of the product, how
the competitors are responding to the launch, etc.
Lessons from Nontraditional Marketing
Ultimately, however, influence operations are in the business of mar-
keting not products, but ideas. For this reason, lessons from three other
sectors—cause marketing, sin marketing, and political marketing—
may be the most useful analogues for understanding how marketing
principles can benefit influence operations.
Case Study of Influence in advertising and Marketing 101
Cause Marketing
Cause marketing may be defined as follows:
Using the skills of advertising to effect social change, to benefit
individuals or society at large. . . . it is advertising in the service of
the public (Earle, 2000, p. 3).
Like influence operations, it asks its target audience not to buy
something, but to buy into something—to avoid cigarettes, alcohol
or drugs, not to litter or leave a campfire unattended, to conserve
resources, or to protect personal information. Perhaps most pertinent
to influence operations, one category of cause marketing campaigns
relates to health and safety issues, such as preventing childhood asthma
or getting help for relatives with Parkinson’s Disease.
The methodology and tools used in product marketing are directly
relevant to cause marketing and influence operations. In fact, they may
be even more critical in these fields for a few reasons. It is harder to sell
an idea than a product, the audience is often harder to understand, the
constraints on what may be included in the message are more signifi-
cant, and the budget is often smaller.
Cause marketing and influence operations share another burden:
There is evidence that a bad cause marketing campaign is worse than
no campaign at all. Researchers have found, for example, that featuring
people doing drugs in ads or featuring the drugs themselves can lead
to greater drug use. Some kids watching an ad that featured other kids
doing drugs concluded that, “those kids are just like me and they seem
like they are having fun.” Or a former addict can be moved to try drugs
again because of such ads (Earle, 2000, p. 11). Similarly, if a message
from influence operations strikes the wrong tone or is misinterpreted,
it can be a great recruiting tool for the other side.
To avoid these pitfalls, there are some important lessons to learn.
First, research to prepare for a cause marketing or influence operations
campaign is very complex and requires great care. The target audience
may be difficult to recruit, to involve in discussions, to read, and to
reach. The very best team should be used in this endeavor. Second,
research is more crucial here than anywhere. Getting the message
102 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
and its tone right can be the difference between success and failure.
Third, because the audience is fickle and complex, it may be necessary
to develop different messages for different targets (e.g., for cause mar-
keting, kids, adults, nonusers, and addicts; for influence operations,
women, men, and majority and minority party members). Also, these
messages cannot just be variations on a theme—they must be built
from the ground up as independent efforts. While McDonalds can use
a German ad (“I’m lovin’ it”) with success in America, that strategy is
unlikely to work for cause marketing or influence operations. Fourth,
unlike product advertising, the target audience for a cause marketing or
influence operations campaign might not be the ultimate target. Often
these campaigns target parents to curb teen smoking, for example, or
the loved one of an addicted gambler rather than the gambler directly.
This strategy might be fruitful for influence operations, too.
Sin Marketing
Ironically, the (almost) flipside of cause marketing, sin marketing, shares
a number of characteristics with influence operations as well. Indeed,
where the United States faces a skeptical or hostile audience whose
basic point of view arises from religious, cultural, or social norms, sin
marketing may accord fairly closely with U.S. brand identification by
foreign audiences.
Sin marketing is the marketing of such socially unacceptable
products as tobacco, alcohol, firearms, gambling, and pornography
(Davidson, 2003). For these products, the marketing environment is
neither positive nor neutral but outright hostile. Individual consumers
may be (and clearly are) supportive of the products, but not in a public
way. Similarly, individual members of enemy forces and civilians in
those countries may be privately supportive of U.S. actions, but they
are reluctant to share that sentiment publicly.
Under these circumstances, there are a few steps that may be taken
to improve the chance of a successful outcome. First, it is best to be as
precise as possible in targeting and advertising to those who are most
receptive to the message so as to minimize public expressions of the
social unacceptability of that message. High-visibility campaigns will
only lead to public denunciation of that campaign and may dissuade
Case Study of Influence in advertising and Marketing 103
some from supporting the campaign who might have otherwise. The
use of email and Web sites—which offer anonymity, a direct connec-
tion to the consumer, convenience, and sophisticated database man-
agement techniques—can be very effective in creating a safe space for
communicating a controversial message.
Second, it may be wise to “de-link” the parent company from the
product. Typically this technique is used to protect the parent com-
pany and its other brands. For example, Altria, the parent company of
Philip Morris, downplays the fact that it makes both Kraft Foods and
Marlboro cigarettes to protect the Kraft brand (and, indeed, Philip
Morris chose the name Altria after deciding that its name had been so
tarnished by its association with cigarettes). But for influence opera-
tions, it may make sense to downplay the association between the mes-
sage and the source (the U.S. government) to protect the message if
anti-American sentiment might lead to added resistance to accepting
the message.
Third, the use of symbols can be effective both as a more accept-
able icon in advertising (e.g., the Nike “swish”) and to help reshape an
image (e.g., Camel was a blue-collar cigarette brand before Joe Camel
was used to sell the cigarette to teens, and Marlboro was an unsuccess-
ful women’s brand before the Marlboro Man was used to turn it into a
successful men’s brand. Indeed, icons can be very powerful even if the
message is not controversial, as demonstrated by the pink ribbons for
breast cancer awareness and treatment.
Fourth, for sin marketing, or for influence operations in which the
United States faces a hostile audience, public relations are much more
important than for mainstream products. There is a greater need both
to improve the image of the products and the brand and to do damage
control to minimize the impact of bad press. It may be the case that
public relations under these conditions are even more important than
in more traditional forms of advertising. For example, the Miller Brew-
ing Company has found that the dollars it spends on public relations
are far more cost-efficient than those it spends on advertising and has
changed its cost mix accordingly (Mandese, 2003). Efforts to improve
the brand image usually focus not on convincing society that the prod-
ucts are not bad, but rather that the company that sells the products is
104 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
committed to the responsible use of these products and is giving back
to the community some of the money that is made in selling these
products. For influence operations, these efforts would include those
that demonstrate that the United States is acting in the interests of the
locals, even when that conflicts with its own goals, and making other
selfless gestures that are meaningful to society.
Political Marketing
Although the subject is discussed in greater detail in the next appendix,
there also are some lessons from the world of political campaigns that
apply to influence operations that we briefly touch upon here.
As with traditional marketing for a new brand, launching a suc-
cessful new influence operations campaign requires a sophisticated
understanding of the competition, anticipation of the competition’s
actions, and advanced planning on how to react to those anticipated
actions. Sometimes the competition with another brand can be so
fierce that it defines the success of the launch. This was the case with
the launch of Nicoderm by SmithKline Beecham, which went head to
head with Nicotrol, and, in fact, political campaign advisers were part
of the inner circle in the early years of Nicoderm’s launch.
Where political campaigns excel is in being prepared for, and even
disarming in advance, any attacks that might be made. To do this,
political campaigns do extensive research on the competition, far more
than in traditional marketing. They build into initial communications
points that address anticipated criticism from detractors, guided by the
belief that the best defense is a good offense. For influence operations,
this would mean extensive research on insurgents or detractors not just
to understand how they plan to undermine the military mission, but
also the battle for the hearts and minds of the civilians.
Expectations for Advertising
But is all this effort worth it? What, if anything, can we expect from
advertising? With the diffusion of information sources and the con-
stant barrage of advertising, can a message get through?
Case Study of Influence in advertising and Marketing 105
Marketing
If a marketer is asked those questions about a specific campaign,
chances are he or she will tell you, “I have no idea.” In a recent survey
of 135 senior-level marketers sponsored by the Association of National
Advertisers, 87 percent say they have “little confidence in their ability
to predict the impact that their TV advertising and marketing efforts
have on sales” (McClellan, 2005). In advertising lore, this sentiment
is paraphrased as: “I know that only half my advertising works; I just
don’t know which half.”5
Indeed three well-designed studies to answer this question found
that advertising works about half the time. One study conducted by
John Philip Jones (2004, pp. 117–119) found that for 20 percent of
brands, mostly small ones, advertising increases sales significantly (on
average doubling sales), for another 20 percent, mostly large brands,
advertising helps maintain and sometimes increases sales, but not
as noticeably, and for the remaining 60 percent, advertising has no
impact. Jones (2004, pp. 63–65) also found that whatever effect adver-
tising has, it occurs primarily after first exposure, and that additional
exposures result in diminishing returns: 70 percent of sales from an
ad occur with only one exposure in a seven-day period, another 20
percent with additional exposure, and only an additional 10 percent
with three exposures or more. Findings from another series of stud-
ies, “How Advertising Works” conducted by Information Resources,
Inc. (see Hu, Lodish, and Krieger, 2008), are consistent with Jones’s
research, concluding that advertising works about half the time, and
mostly for new and growing brands.
More recently, Deutsche Bank commissioned a study of 23
household, personal-care, food, and beverage brands and found that
TV advertising generated a positive return on investment in the first
year only 18 percent of the time and over a longer period 45 percent of
the time. Positive returns were mostly found among the newer brands
or brands with substantially new products (e.g., Crest Whitestrips and
Swiffer). But a few mature brands, such as Gatorade, Tide, and Bud
Light, also had strong returns, which Deutsche Bank attributed to
5 Attributed to department store founder John Wanamaker (1838–1922).
106 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
good advertising (Neff, 2004). Brand loyalty, however, also could have
played a role.
Nontraditional Marketing
For nontraditional marketing, positive results are also evident but may
take longer to see. Changing ideas and values is possible, but this hap-
pens slowly, particularly when those beliefs are strongly held and par-
ticularly when there are strong social incentives not to accept the alter-
native view. Since 1992, Massachusetts has reduced adult smoking by
41 percent, two and one-half times the national average (Massachusetts
Office of Health and Human Services, n.d.). The state attributes much
of this success to its advertising. However, this impact has required a
steady stream of advertising over a ten-year period.
In a set of findings that resonates strongly with the social power
model that was described earlier, how quickly results can be expected
depends on five variables through which social changes occur:
Predisposition:• whether the message conflicts with traditional
beliefs and values that are proving satisfactory
Perception:• whether the message appears to have advantages now
or in the future that can be intelligently demonstrated
Other people:• whether the message is introduced by people consid-
ered important and competent and who have consulted the target
audience or its respected leaders
Personality traits:• whether the message is in accord with the modal
personality traits (e.g., adaptable versus rigid) of the society or
with a goal the target audience is seeking
Learning:• whether the message makes demands whose compo-
nents the target audience has already learned or feels confident it
can learn (e.g., does it have a history with democracy or believe
that it can adapt to democracy) (Zaltman, Kotler, and Kaufman,
1972, pp. 68–70). 6
6 Note that there is a rich psychological literature on how to effect changes in attitudes
(through presentation of facts versus more emotional techniques, behavior modification
techniques, group dynamics, etc.).
Case Study of Influence in advertising and Marketing 107
There are two conclusions IO planners should draw from this list.
First, the road ahead is steep. It is likely that for any given effort, none
of these forces will naturally be working in a campaign’s favor. Second,
to see quicker change, efforts need to be made to try to manipulate
these variables in ways that benefit the aims of the influence opera-
tions. Can the message be framed to more closely coincide with tradi-
tional beliefs? Are there individuals who may be enlisted to help spread
the message and who would have credibility with the target audience?
Very careful planning and a deep understanding of the culture into
which these ideas are introduced are required. If these factors cannot
be turned to an advantage, expectations should be set that effects will
take longer to see.
How Things Can Go Wrong
The odds of success in the advertising world are not highly favorable,
and an advertiser’s fate depends to a large extent on the cards that he
or she is dealt. For example, it is much easier to increase sales on a new
brand than on a mature or declining brand, and it is much easier if the
competition is not already well established (and well funded). These
odds may be improved somewhat, however, by avoiding a few key pit-
falls, as discussed below.
Not Enough Research
Brand teams may be very skilled at many things, but few can accurately
assess consumer preferences consistently. One study by Leo Bogart
(1995) examined the predictive powers of 83 advertising decisionmak-
ers (brand managers, advertising managers, agency account executives,
and creative, media, and research people) and found that while these
experts could judge well whether the ad would be noticed, they were
poor forecasters of its selling ability. (This point also illustrates that the
relationship between memorable advertising and effective advertising
is weak.) Research is needed to understand the target audience and
how it responds to the product, the packaging, the taglines, the price,
etc. One famous example illustrates this point. While in blind taste
108 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
tests the new formulation of Coca-Cola was preferred, brand users had
a very negative reaction when it was associated with the Coca-Cola
brand. Surprised by this reaction, the company had to pull the new
formulation and launch a major public relations effort to undo the
damage. Given the inherent uncertainties arising from the dominance
of context-dependent factors in outcomes, whether there can ever be
enough research to accurately predict the results of influence efforts
remains an important question.
Misinterpretation of the Research
Perhaps the best way to make this point is using a quotation from
David Ogilvy, a well-known advertising executive: “Research is often
misused by agencies . . . as a drunkard uses a lamppost—not for illumi-
nation, but for support!” Research can be, and often is, manipulated to
conform to a certain view not found in the data alone and with detri-
mental consequences to the success of the brand. It is critical that each
member of a brand team work to maintain objectivity in interpreting
the research.
Ignoring the Research
Sometimes, those responsible for designing the advertising may even
be hostile to the research, believing that it encumbers their creativity.
But to be effective, advertising must be both entertaining and moti-
vating. Entertaining ads may win awards, but alone they do not sell
products. For this reason, the brand team members must be ever vigi-
lant in reminding their agency of the advice from Mark Twain to “kill
your darlings,” the words or phrases (or in this case, the advertising
elements) that you are keeping in just because you love them and not
because they support the message.
Too Many, or Competing, Messages
Finally, many brand teams err by trying too many approaches at the
same time. To be successful, marketing and advertising needs to stick
to a single message.7 That focus can help the brand build equity among
7 The “keep it simple, stupid” (KISS) principle is an apt one.
Case Study of Influence in advertising and Marketing 109
consumers much more quickly (few would hear the phrase “Just Do
It” and not think of Nike) and help consumers evaluate whether the
product is right for them. No one has learned this lesson better than
political campaign advisors, who are constantly reminding their clients
to “stay on message.”
Influence in Advertising and Marketing: Conclusions
This appendix has examined the well-honed marketing tools that con-
tribute to successful advertising in the private sector, but also in more
nontraditional fields. Our case study of advertising and marketing
offers the following lessons for influence operations:
Practitioners exhibit great clarity in their aim of selling a good or•
service by fostering a specific purchasing behavior.
Advertisers and markets seek to differentiate and segment their•
markets and audiences (e.g., early adopters versus others) and
develop appeals that are most likely to resonate with each.
Practitioners rely heavily on a wide range of sophisticated tech-•
niques to understand and try to predict consumer behavior.
Practitioners also rely upon a mix of emotional, cognitive, and•
creative appeals that are tested and refined to maximize their
impact.
The high costs of advertising and the highly competitive advertis-•
ing and marketing environment make it a high-stakes enterprise
that frequently leads to clear winners and losers.
Finally, in contrast to the enthusiasm and hype often encountered,•
advertising and marketing techniques’ potential contributions to
information and influence operations should create modest expec-
tations; for every stunning advertising success story, there is likely
to be at least one catastrophic failure.
There are parallel steps in the design of a new product line and the
design of an influence operations campaign. Ideally, those designing
that campaign would work to understand what unmet needs exist in
110 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
the population; what actions the United States could take to fill those
needs; what targets are most receptive to that message; what language
best communicates the message; which information vehicles are best
designed to distribute that message; and, after the campaign, which
aspects of the campaign were the most and least successful. While suc-
cessful execution of these individual steps certainly does not guarantee
the success of an overall campaign, it is fair to say that failure in any
one of them could easily lead to the overall failure of a campaign. 8
8 For a rather enthusiastic view of the contributions Madison Avenue advertising and
marketing approaches might make to winning the popular support of foreign publics, see
Helmus, Paul, and Glenn, 2007. For a somewhat less optimistic—and more empirical—
analysis of the specific attitudes, beliefs, and other factors that drive or constrain popular
support for the United States in one theater of operation (South Korea), see Larson et al.,
2004.
111
appEndIx B
Case Study of Influence in Political Campaigns1
Introduction
Political campaigns lie at the heart of the American political system.
Campaigns present voters with information and a choice of candidates
in a democratic process; they are characterized as intense activities,
zero-sum, winner-takes-all games. As described in the last appendix,
political campaigns also can be thought of as a special case of cause
marketing, in which the cause is a candidate or proposition.
Political campaigns require getting a message across to voters. To
do that, campaigns must define what the message is and devise a strat-
egy to reach voters who will be swayed by that message. How these
essential activities are carried out depends on whether the campaign is
strictly party centered or candidate centered:
In the case of party-centered campaigns, the message is the party•
platform, one or several planks, and the voters to be reached are
those who make up the party’s core constituency and others to
whom the message might appeal.
For candidate-centered campaigns, the task is more complex.•
Candidates must decide at an early stage whether they will stick
to the party’s message or devise their own. They must also decide
1 This appendix was written by Daniel Gibran.
112 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
what particular issues or other factors voters are most concerned
with and who precisely are those voters. 2
In general, the main objective of political campaigns is straight-
forward: to mobilize a majority (or plurality) of voters to vote for (or
against) a candidate. Underneath this broad objective, there is a range
of nested subobjectives for political campaigns:
Influence people who are predisposed to vote for the candidate to•
register, without influencing those predisposed to vote against the
candidate to do so.
Influence registered voters inclined to vote for the candidate to•
turn out at the polls, and influence others to stay home.
Influence voters to vote for (or against) a candidate.• 3
Thus, the principal focus of contemporary political campaigns is
not only to energize the party’s base but also to persuade voters to go
out and vote on Election Day.
The landscape of American political campaigns has changed
dramatically over the last three decades. Public opinion polling, for
example, is now the key to nearly every facet of campaigning. And a
campaign cannot even be contemplated without ample access to tech-
nology and a vigorous research undertaking. These changes have also
restructured the focus of campaigns.
While candidates are ultimately responsible for their campaigns,
they cannot compete effectively, let alone win, without professional
help. In sum, political consultants have become indispensable to
modern political campaigns in America, and their craft is based on
“customary activities that are modified by the trial and error of individ-
ual practice” rather than on any theoretical underpinnings (Johnson-
Cartee and Copeland, 1997, p. xix).
2 There is, for example, some evidence suggesting that simply increasing an individual’s
exposure to a candidate can increase liking. Negative campaigning also can affect voters’
views.
3 We note that such objectives as influencing voters to stay home counter cherished Ameri-
can values and can be viewed as subverting the democratic process.
Case Study of Influence in political Campaigns 113
“No other area of American politics,” write Shea and Burton
(2001, p. 3), “has so drastically changed over the last few decades than
the manner in which candidates pursue votes.” Where once the politi-
cal party, the center of campaign activity for over 150 years, served as
the organizational foundation of American politics, its role today has
been diminished somewhat to servicing the needs of a running can-
didate through financial contributions and expertise. It appears that
political consultants and, to a lesser extent, political action committees
now occupy the center stage of the American political campaign pro-
cess. In short, contemporary campaigns are not fully party centered,
nor are they strictly candidate centered, rather they are more consul-
tant centered (Shea and Burton, 2001, p. 12).
The role of political consultants underscores the paramount task
of campaigns, i.e., to connect with voters. The consultants and their
teams devise the strategies, implement the tactics, and manage the
campaign. All of these activities, however, are still being conducted
alongside the political party, which continues to provide the platform
for the campaign process.
As will be described, the political campaign process is a very
highly developed and sophisticated art form in America. It is costly
and involves a large cadre of committed supporters working over an
extended time period during an election. It is a fierce contest carried out
within circumscribed rules and legal boundaries that were established
over hundreds of years. It uses state-of-the-art communications tech-
niques, such as the Internet, television, direct mail, and phone banks,
and sophisticated methodologies to assess voters’ attitudes toward par-
ticular messages and candidates.
Campaign strategists/consultants divide the electorate in a vari-
ety of ways—by demographic characteristics, economic interests, geo-
graphic location, gender, income, and education. The goal is to use
survey research and polling data to determine what appeals will work
with audiences and have the running candidate address those audi-
ences with the appropriate message. And the message is communicated
through both the free and paid media.
This appendix is an attempt to describe, among other things, how
political campaigns achieve their objectives of electing a candidate
114 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
and, in particular, how they assess the electorate, how they develop
and pursue winning strategies, the types of techniques and research
tools they use, and the multiple roles they play in the entire process. It
draws on the current literature and identifies various theoretical and
practical considerations that go into political campaigns. It also offers
some thoughts on potential lessons for the U.S. military and its influ-
ence operations efforts in places such as Iraq and Afghanistan.
This discussion will be organized according to a framework that
is easily adaptable to various situations, as follows:
Assess the electorate.•
Identify target groups.•
Measure baseline attitudes.•
Develop, test, and field messages.•
Measure again, and adapt messages to changing circumstances or•
developments.
Assessing the Electorate
Assessing the Political Terrain
An assessment of the electorate begins with the knowledge and under-
standing of what campaign consultants refer to as the landscape, the
environment, or the political terrain. Understanding this context or
landscape is key to distinguishing the tractable elements from the
intractable ones. Who else is on the ballot, what do the demographics
look like, what office is being contested? These are some of the ques-
tions that define the terrain and must be addressed before discussion of
campaign strategy and tactics (Shea and Burton, 2001, p. 25). While
campaigns are about strategy, they are also about the terrain on which
the strategy operates. In many respects, they are like military cam-
paigns. The literature likens a political campaign to what military com-
manders do when preparing for a war. Take geography for example.
No modern campaign strategy can be launched successfully, whether
at the national or at the state and local levels, without geographic con-
siderations. The physical characteristics of a district, such as its size,
Case Study of Influence in political Campaigns 115
density, and location, mold campaign activities and constitute a crucial
step in the evaluation process.
Demographics
One very important assessment technique is demographic research
describing the characteristics of the electorate, which is very different
from opinion polling, which focuses on attitudes. 4 Demography is the
study of population, and demographers quantify a population’s size,
growth, education, gender, race, ethnicity, income, and other features
in order to construct a profile of the target population.
All political campaigns need demographics, and any winning
strategy is influenced by the knowledge of a district’s demographic pro-
file: its mix of race, ethnicity, consumer preference, education levels,
gender distribution, and a range of other attributes that define the elec-
torate. How a campaign collects and uses this information at the aggre-
gate level can determine a candidate’s success or failure. Accordingly,
to target the right voters, political campaigns rely on demographic
research. Demographers assume that “populations are heterogeneous,”
that this “heterogeneity can be used to divide voters into separate ana-
lytic groups,” and that “membership in a demographic group suggests
shared concerns” (Shea and Burton, 2001, pp. 43–44). There typically
is a fairly strong correlation between party preference and wealth, race,
and occupation, for example.
Demographic inference remains a business of probabilities, not
certainties. For political campaigns, conjectures and assumptions
about the relationship between characteristics of the electorate and
their likely voting behavior are tested and refined using a variety of
statistical tools. These tools help campaign planners discover which
groups are likely to matter the most in building a winning coalition, so
that these groups can be targeted with the most appropriate messages.
In other words, aggregation of the collected data on individuals helps
4 A campaign planner’s need for demographic information is aptly illustrated in the
1986 film, Power, when Gene Hackman, playing the role of an aging political campaigner,
approaches a former colleague, Richard Gere, now a “new-style” political consultant, and
requests crucial information on how to make his candidate competitive. Hackman lacked
one of the basic tools of the new craft.
116 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
campaign researchers to understand the character of larger groups.
For example, white males as a group tend to vote differently than say
unmarried black women, and, as a group, older people are more likely
to vote than are younger people. Rather than shooting in the dark,
analysis of demographic data can help a campaign to target its message
at those voters in a district whom it is most likely to be able to persuade
and avoid wasting scarce campaign resources on those it is unlikely to
influence. In sum, good demographic research, an indispensable tool
in a campaign’s arsenal, compiles and provides a general understanding
of an electorate.
In addition to the Statistical Abstract of the United States, the U.S.
Census remains the major source of demographic information for polit-
ical campaigns. While Census data are not perfect, they do provide a
wide variety of demographic characteristics that are useful to the politi-
cal researcher. These data are presented in two basic formats, namely,
summary data and micro-data. Summary data sets are based on spe-
cific geographic units, such as states, cities, and townships, and are
considered standard information. Micro-data sets, on the other hand,
are a completely different type of resource. A researcher can restructure
micro-data information to perform queries on individual-level sur-
veys. Thus, the key to using Census data is the search for demographic
correspondence and specificity. Once data are gathered, they can be
imported into a database and displayed on a spreadsheet, or they can
be represented in a more complex way through a relational database
management system that the researcher can use for linking data sets.
This combination of individual-level data with demographic informa-
tion provides campaign consultants with better insights on subgroups
and, thus, helps them to convey their messages to the right voters. In
short, demographics provide very useful information, and campaign
strategies are shaped by such information.
Developing and Pursuing Winning Strategies
A strategic visualization of the district is a general theory of electioneer-
ing, applicable at all campaign levels. In devising winning strategies,
Case Study of Influence in political Campaigns 117
political consultants constantly seek a clearer and better understand-
ing of an electoral district. Electoral history provides some guidelines:
A district that votes two-thirds Republican in a national election in
2004 will in all probability vote the same way in 2008. This postulate
“helps campaign professionals see what precincts have a highly parti-
san vote and which fluctuate between Republicans and Democrats”
(Shea and Burton, 2001, p. 76). Thus, campaign professionals know
through historical data that some districts vote Republican or Demo-
crat by roughly the same percentage year after year and that some states
are more favorable to third-party candidates, and they use this under-
standing in the development of their campaign strategy.
A typical visual representation of an electorate shows a district
that generally splits its vote 50-50 between Republicans and Demo-
crats. This configuration is illustrated in Figure B.1.
The figure shows that only about 20–25 percent of the elector-
ate (the base-partisan vote) is a lock for either political party. About
16 percent on each side (the soft-partisan vote) probably will vote for
each party, and 16 percent of the vote (the toss-up) is completely up for
grabs. This model underscores an important political truth: In a com-
Figure B.1
Diagramming an Electorate
RAND MG654-B.1
SoftBase
Partisan vote Partisan vote
BaseSoft
Average Democratic performance Average Republican performance
Toss-up vote
Swing vote
Liberal Democrat Conservative Republican
118 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
petitive election, a small group of generally uncommitted voters can
decide the outcome. Thus, electoral targeting is a perennial quest for
the deciding vote (the median voter) that resides with a small group.5
Campaigns can differ in how they go about attempting to cap-
ture the median voter. Perhaps the most striking recent example of
differences in strategy is to be found in the 2004 presidential contest
between Republican incumbent George W. Bush and Democratic chal-
lenger John Kerry. By all accounts, the Bush strategy was to mobilize
turnout from his base of Republican conservatives, evangelical Chris-
tians, and others who already were predisposed to vote for him and to
avoid diluting his message to appeal to more-moderate voters. By com-
parison, the Kerry strategy appears to have been composed of a mix of
comparable efforts to mobilize the Democratic faithful and efforts to
increase Kerry’s appeal to moderates who were, for example, concerned
about national security issues.
Developing a winning strategy thus depends on knowing the
number of potential voters residing in a district. In addition to map-
ping the district, i.e., by examining its social, economic, and politi-
cal cultures, the campaign would want to know how many people are
registered to vote, what party they belong to, and how many eligible
voters actually vote on Election Day. Through statistical analyses of
data gleaned from the historical record and current aggregate data,
campaign professionals decide what strategies to pursue.
To underscore the accomplishments of the running candidate
and translate his or her achievements into practical and appealing con-
nectors to voters, campaign researchers often prepare two sets of docu-
ments, one containing simple, straightforward information about the
5 The vagaries of Electoral College politics complicate this simple voting rule in that a
single candidate wins all of the electoral votes for states in which he or she enjoys a majority
or plurality. Three-way contests typically are decided by a simple plurality of voters. In the
1992 three-way contest between incumbent George H.W. Bush and challengers Bill Clin-
ton and Ross Perot, for example, Arkansas governor and presidential aspirant Bill Clinton
won 43 percent of the popular vote, while incumbent George Bush won about 38 percent,
and third-party challenger Ross Perot won about 19 percent. The winner-take-all nature of
the electoral vote count made the result even more lopsided, however: Perot failed to win a
single state, leaving Clinton with 370 electoral votes, and Bush 168, a better than two-to-one
advantage.
Case Study of Influence in political Campaigns 119
candidate for general use; the other a more detailed version of the can-
didate’s life, public service, and accomplishments (Shea and Burton,
2001, pp. 66–67 ). While not a legal requirement, the elaborated ver-
sion is prepared for possible use when it is needed and serves a useful
purpose in meeting the opposition’s challenge and answering media
queries.
Of the various strategies mentioned so far, opposition research
is perhaps the most interesting and has direct relevance to influence
operations efforts to counter adversary propaganda. In contemporary
politics, a campaign strategy that fails to engage in opposition research
is ill-equipped to exploit the opposition’s vulnerabilities. While both
incumbents and challengers in a race use opposition research as an
offensive weapon, it seems to be a particularly useful stratagem for the
latter when a race is tight and when political symbolism takes hold
most strongly when it is confirmatory of an underlying belief. 6
Not all opposition research is implemented in service to mud-
slinging. Republican consultant Terry Cooper observed that opposi-
tion research is an increasingly important tool in the campaign for the
challenger who is less known to the electorate. Such research, he said
“is valuable because of voter inertia—the tendency of the vast majority
of the electorate to re-elect the incumbent or vote for the better-known
candidate unless someone gives them good reason to do otherwise”
(Cooper, 1991, p. 18). But what exactly is opposition research, and why
is it considered a useful campaign strategy?
Opposition research “is public-records research on the political,
business, professional and personal background of candidates” (Reger,
2003, p. 215). A highly technical and complex process, it involves
information gathering and analysis of publicly verifiable documents. It
embraces both the prospective and retrospective aspects of evaluation.
The first aspect is based on anticipatory assumptions, what the candi-
date promises to do for voters, and his or her qualifications and person-
ality. A good example of this prospective lens is when presidential can-
6 A widely cited example was the image of Democratic presidential contender Michael
Dukakis wearing an oversized helmet while riding in a tank. The image was meant to bur-
nish his credentials as strong on defense, but generally was viewed in the opposite light.
120 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
didate Bill Clinton promised a “bridge to the 21 century” to American
voters. Retrospective evaluations look at past actions in order to judge
a candidate’s future behavior. For example, when Ronald Reagan asked
during a debate with president Carter, “Are you better off now than
you were four years ago?” he was directing voters to look at the Carter
administration’s past problems.
Political campaigns focus on the retrospective because the past
is not only “considered a strong predictor of the future,” it is also less
complex for voters to decipher (Shea and Burton, 2001, p. 60). Opposi-
tion research, therefore, is an information-gathering process that lever-
ages “a message by specifically attacking an opponent’s weakest points”
(Cooper, 2003, p. 204). According to Rich Galen (2003, p. 199), it “is
the process of finding out as much about your opponent as your oppo-
nent probably knows about you.” In nearly all instances, it seeks out
bits and pieces of factual information that, when given a certain inter-
pretation, conveys a negative message of the opponent to the electorate
by pointing out shortcomings in past behavior. In doing so, it “taps
into the process of retrospective evaluation” (Shea and Burton, 2003,
p. 60). The rationale is based on the premise that a message that focuses
on an opposition candidate’s past has a powerful appeal to voters, even
while they decry negative campaigns. In the election process all across
America, opposition research now occupies a special place among cam-
paign professionals, and for those running an underdog campaign, it is
a highly essential ingredient in the strategic mix.
The utility of opposition research lies in its persuasive appeal to
factual information placed in a proper perspective. Merely regurgitat-
ing a statement of fact about an opposition candidate is not very useful.
For example, a research report on presidential hopeful Michael Duka-
kis stating that while he was governor of Massachusetts supported a
“furlough” program is an interesting piece of fact but not very helpful
as it lacks perspective. Using this same fact, if this report should state
that Dukakis “supported a furlough program that allowed first-degree
murderers to have furloughs, including Willie Horton,” the appeal to
voters would be more persuasive (Reger, 2003, p. 216). And that was
precisely what was done.
Case Study of Influence in political Campaigns 121
Opposition research is simply knowing where the opponent stands
vis-à-vis one’s own position and then hitting him or her at his or her
weakest points. It is not necessarily about “dirty tricks,” although the
information is quite often presented in a slightly twisted form to make
the facts more appealing to voters and damaging to the opponent. And
although retrospective in most instances, the facts are skillfully manip-
ulated to serve a partisan end.
Advertising is another strategy political campaigns use to energize
their base and get their candidate’s message across to voters. Johnson-Cartee
and Copeland (1997, p. 149) noted: “political advertising has become
almost synonymous with political campaigning.” Since becoming part
of the campaign staple, research studies have confirmed that political
advertising is both effective and an important component of the politi-
cal process (Johnson-Cartee and Copeland, 1997, p. 150). However,
advertising’s efficacy does not span the entire spectrum of the voting
public or of all types of elections. Research conducted in 1975 and
after “has demonstrated that the effectiveness of political advertising
[was] strongest in low-level and local races such as primary elections,
nonpartisan races, and races for state positions and campaigns for the
House of Representatives” (Johnson-Cartee and Copeland, 1997, p.
153). Effects also operate on different levels according to a typology
devised by Kaid. They can be cognitive, what people know; affective,
how people feel about what they know, and behavioral, how people act
based on what they know and feel (Kaid, 1981). Devlin (1986) exam-
ined the purposes for which political advertising can be effectively used
and constructed a “typology” of potential goals. He recognized the fol-
lowing goals. Political advertising
develops name recognition for a candidate•
acts as a reinforcing agent for those who have selected a candidate•
to support
may be used to redefine the perceptions of a candidate or party•
is used because it is conceived as expected behavior for a•
candidate.
122 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
Political advertising is an important aspect of the American elec-
toral landscape. It providers voters information on candidates, and
according to Johnson-Cartee and Copeland (1997, p. 155), it “is effec-
tive, strategic, and necessary” Per Johnson-Cartee and Copeland (1997,
p. 162), advertising strategies fall into one of four categories of ads,
namely:
Positive ads:1. designed to position the candidate and improve his
or her name recognition; they also state the candidate’s perspec-
tives on issues and promote his or her leadership qualities.
Negative ads:2. used to question the opponent’s fitness for office
by casting him or her in an inferior position, hence unfit to hold
office.
Reactive response ads:3. designed to answer the opposition’s nega-
tive ads.
Proactive inoculation ads:4. used to undermine, deflect, and reduce
the power of anticipated negative attacks.
While the majority of political ads fall into the first two catego-
ries, there has been a steep increase in negative ads over the past sev-
eral years. In the last two general elections, for example, negative ads
dominated the airwaves, with many of them being “uncreative, mean-
spirited, heavy-handed, tasteless, insulting or just plain stupid” (Seder,
2003, p. 379).
One of the latest and perhaps hottest trends in political campaign
strategy is the use of mass-produced videos, DVDs, and the Internet.
Given the exorbitant cost of television advertising and “increased audi-
ence fracturing” (Faucheux, 2003, p. 392), many campaigns have been
forced to devise new and innovative strategies to extend their target
range. The political use of videos has many advantages, ranging from
cost savings and potency of an extended message to pinpoint target
distribution and momentum creation. And they can be used at appro-
priate times to define a candidate’s image and central message, for
fundraising, for recruiting and mobilizing volunteers, and for target-
ing messages to special groups of voters (Faucheux, 2003, pp. 392–
393). During the 2004 general election, the Internet’s use for fund-
Case Study of Influence in political Campaigns 123
raising, opinion formation, interest mediation, message dissemination,
and feedback was spectacular. For example, it is widely believed that
Howard Dean’s early success during the 2004 Democratic primary run
can be attributed to his skilful use of the Internet in mobilizing the
Democratic base of liberals, particularly in the area of fundraising. In
a similar vein, in the 2000 Republican primary, a political consulting
firm reportedly “helped raise $6.4 million online for John McCain’s
presidential campaign” (Ireland and Nash, 2003, p. 605).
Techniques and Analytic Tools
Political campaigns are said by practitioners to be more art than science
and, to the extent that they are a science at all, an inexact one. This is
not to say that scientific methodologies and tools are irrelevant or unim-
portant to political campaigns. To be sure, campaign managers do rely
on scientific techniques to inform their strategies and tactics. But the
process as a whole is infused more with tried and successful practices
than with hard science. However, the tools or mechanics of political
campaigns have changed dramatically over the past several years, with
the adoption of new communication technologies such as the Internet,
direct mailing, and phone banks. “These innovations,” writes Andrea
Rommele (2003, p. 8), “have occurred alongside an intensification of
existing methods of divining voters’ thoughts, such as opinion polls
and focus groups.” The following focuses on some of the more specific
techniques political campaigns use: focus groups, polling, direct mail,
and message design and word choice.
Focus Groups
Focus groups have come of age in political campaigns. Their wide use
in the commercial marketplace is well documented, and only in the
mid-1980s did this technique become commonplace in major politi-
cal campaigns. Today, it is a standard research tool in almost all races
and with “their electronic cousin, dial meter groups, have become the
hot, even faddish, new tool in the pollster’s arsenal” (Johnson, 2001,
p. 102). They reveal useful information about attitudes, fears, and
124 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
preferences—information that helps campaigns structure their mes-
sages with optimal resonance.
The focus group is a structured conversation. Krueger (1988, p.
18) defines it as “a carefully planned discussion designed to obtain per-
ceptions on a defined area of interest in a permissive, nonthreatening
environment.” To achieve this meticulously planned discussion, eight
to twelve individuals, carefully chosen to fit a targeted demographic or
political cluster, are asked both general and specific questions by a skil-
ful “moderator adept at bringing out participants’ responses through
open-ended questions and associational techniques” (Johnson, 2001, p.
102). The selection of participants is a carefully planned undertaking.
This sharing of a set of common characteristics creates a homogeneous
group, which in turn fosters the permissive, nonthreatening environ-
ment needed for cohesion and smooth functionality. Moreover, small
group participation and dynamics are also considered important fea-
tures of focus groups.
With members seated around a table, the moderator works from
a carefully prepared script, soliciting responses from participants in a
variety of ways. The discussion is recorded either on audio or on vid-
eotape so that a transcript and a detailed analysis become available to
members for comments. Thus, “it is the transcript of the focus group
that serves as the source of the actual data from a focus group” (John-
son-Cartee and Copeland, 1997, p. 141). The transcript provides a sense
of the views, both rational and emotional, of participants and conveys
insights that can prove very useful in campaign strategy.
While the focus group method is in vogue in political campaigns,
it is not the panacea for all campaign ills. In a number of instances,
however, it has unearthed the magic bullet, that “piece of information
that turns a fledging campaign into a winner”(Hunter, 2003, p. 190).
The Willie Horton episode in the 1988 presidential campaign, its par-
ticular twist and raw emotional appeal, were revealed in a focus group.
A Time magazine report recalled the scene:
The moderator began asking rhetorical questions. “What if I told
you that Dukakis vetoed a bill requiring schoolchildren to say the
Pledge of Allegiance? Or, that he was against the death penalty?
Case Study of Influence in political Campaigns 125
Or that he gave weekend furloughs to first-degree murderers?”
“He is a liberal!” exclaimed one man at the table. “If those are
really his positions,” a woman added, “I’d have a hard time sup-
porting him” (“Nine Key Moments,” 1988).
The result: Bush, who had been 16 points behind Dukakis in the
polls, pulled ahead and won. While focus groups can provide useful
insights, they seem most useful in providing campaigns with informa-
tion that was overlooked or misread by the campaign team.
Polling
Polling is an important element of modern survey research. A multibillion-
dollar enterprise in the business sector in which it was pioneered many
years ago in the form of consumer testing of products, polling has
become the cornerstone of U.S. elections. It is an efficient means by
which political campaigns come to understand what issues are really
important to voters. Moreover, campaigns conduct polls to test and
fine-tune their central message or theme to ensure clarity and appeal.
Polling is costly, an expensive undertaking that every campaign budgets
for because of its strategic value. It is one of the best ways to “gain accu-
rate data about the attitudes and perceptions of the electorate. When
political operatives want reliable information about voter attitudes,
polling is considered a necessity” (Shea and Burton, 2001, p. 100). It
has become the key to every facet of campaigning and office holding.
“Candidates and office-holders,” opines Dennis Johnson (2001, p. 90),
a practitioner of the art, “increasingly rely on the weathervane of public
opinion to point to the mood of the public, adjust to its nuances, and
use the public as a sounding board for campaign and policy themes.”
According to veteran Democratic pollster William Hamilton (1995,
p. 178), polling is the “central nervous system” of modern political
campaigns.
Polling has several uses.7 It begins with assessments of name rec-
ognition and candidate preference. It helps to identify and accurately
pinpoint voters’ concerns. In other words, it helps a campaign organi-
7 See Shea and Burton, 2001, pp. 101–102, for a complete list of the uses of polling.
126 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
zation find the right issues to focus on. Polling also conveys the elector-
ate’s sense of the candidates, how they are perceived, and what behav-
ior, inappropriate or otherwise, would be of concern. Another use of
polling is the information it unearths about voters’ underlying atti-
tudes about various social and political values. At its best, “polls allow
campaign managers to gauge the potential effectiveness of strategies
and tactics” (Shea and Burton, 2001, p. 102).
Political campaigns conduct several types of polls during an elec-
tion run, ranging from benchmark surveys that illuminate preexisting
beliefs and attitudes to trend surveys and tracking polls that can be
used to assess the success of the campaign. Focus groups are widely
used in the beginning of a campaign, setting the stage for the bench-
mark survey. This survey is the first major poll taken by a campaign to
provide baseline measures on a variety of issues. It allows for a detailed
analysis of strengths and weaknesses, message relevance, and fine-tuning
of the campaign theme. It normally consists of a large sample, has a
long list of questions, and is conducted about eight to twelve months
before the campaign starts in earnest. This provides campaign consul-
tants with sufficient time for analysis and strategy optimization. Trend
surveys, less cumbersome than the benchmark poll, are usually taken
four or five months after the first major poll. They are conducted when
there are discernable movements or changes in the campaign, such as
commercials run by the opponent. In some campaigns, a follow-up
poll is conducted around the halfway point for the purpose of uncov-
ering and correcting any strategic mistakes. During the last weeks of
a campaign, tracking polls are conducted to determine late trends or
movements of public preference. They are short and cover a limited
range of questions.
Campaigns use a number of statistical techniques to analyze poll-
ing data for the purpose of fine-tuning their candidate’s message; data
analysis has become a crucial part of modern political campaigns.
The analysis of means and standard deviations is a simple but
useful approach for understanding the distribution of responses on a
variable, and it can help campaigns determine subgroup differences
and illuminate the sorts of messages that might resonate with particu-
lar voters.
Case Study of Influence in political Campaigns 127
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) and chi-squared automatic inter-
action detector (CHAID) analysis are multivariate techniques that seg-
ment a sample according to the relationship between the dependent
variable in the analysis and a set of predictors or independent variables.
CHAID is a technique that “examines all possible splits of the depen-
dent variable by performing classification and segmentation analysis
using significance testing. It is a method [campaign researchers] use
for profiling a candidate’s base, opposition and, most importantly, the
swing voters” (Wilson, 2003, p. 171). CHAID analysis identifies where
the swing voters live; their income level, gender, and education; and
who among them are likely to turn out on Election Day and vote. By
employing this technique, campaign strategists are able to identify and
craft the messages that resonate best with these swing voters.
Simple and multiple correlation analysis can help reveal associ-
ations between variables, e.g., the relationship between respondents’
voting intentions and the messages they remember; regression analysis
can help model relationships between variables and make predictions
regarding important phenomena, such as which voters are most likely
to respond positively to direct mail and phone calls. 8
Direct Mail
Direct mail has become an increasingly important means of commu-
nicating messages to possible supporters. Direct mail is influenced by
what political consultants call targeting: Rather than sending out mail
to all potential voters in a district, for maximum effect, a campaign
targets those who could vote for the campaign’s candidate if it just
worked harder to get their votes. This category of voters, those who
could vote for the campaign’s candidate, becomes the target for direct
8 Other, more sophisticated techniques also are used in some rare cases. For example,
ratio-scaled metric multidimensional scaling “allows the investigator [political researcher]
to specify the precise messages which are likely to yield the most positive audience response”
(Woelfel et al., n.d.[a], p. 10). Another sophisticated method that is seeing some use is the
neural net, a software program that mimics the architecture of the human brain and memory.
Like the brain, it is made up of cells or neurons that can learn and make associations. Neural
nets “can help to recognize patterns that are not linear in nature . . . [and] to sort out voter
history data which tends to be messy, nonlinear and very important in predicting behavior”
(Malchow, 2003, p. 235).
128 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
mail. Direct-mail campaigns can involve sending multiple messages to
the target audience, although, at some point, sending additional mes-
sages may prove to be counterproductive.
Green (2004) cites the estimates of presidential political strategist
Karl Rove regarding the effects of direct mail during the 1994 Texas
governor’s race. Figure B.2 plots these data as solid lines along with
notional extrapolations in dashed lines.
As shown in the figure—and similar to what was described in
our review of the empirical literature on the effects of advertising and
marketing in Chapter Three—the greatest return occurs with the first
messages, and the dose-response function is characterized by diminish-
ing, and then negative, returns.
Message Design and Word Choice
Campaigns seek to boost their candidates profiles and appeals to voters
by ensuring a high level of message relevance. Developing the right
message, one that appeals to voters’ needs and connects issues with
peoples’ concerns and their lives, one that is relevant and timely, is the
Figure B.2
Impact of Direct Mail During 1994 Texas Governor’s Race
RAND MG654-B.2
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.70
0
98765
Number of messages
43210 10
Probability (turnout)
Rove data
Extrapolated
Case Study of Influence in political Campaigns 129
“paramount task of the campaign” (Johnson, 2001, p. 66). The artful
form and the personal manner in which messages can be portrayed to
potential voters are indeed fascinating and compelling. Consider the
following statements (Johnson, 2001, p. 66):
Senator A forced the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to•
close eight toxic waste dumps; now our communities are healthier
and our children are much safer.
Twelve hundred new jobs have come to our community thanks to•
Senator A’s tough action and leadership in Washington.
The idea informing this art form is to make a political message rel-
evant to the needs of voters by showing them how their aspirations can
be met by the candidate. In other words, ensuring message relevance
helps voters to understand and connect with an issue that is meaning-
ful to them. For example, most voters are not interested in the esoteric
debates of a complicated World Trade Organization agreement that
a running candidate participated in, but rather, how that candidate
fought for jobs and higher wages during the negotiations. The strategy
most likely to win votes is the one that connects a candidate’s campaign
message to the needs of the electorate. In sum, voters must understand
the relationship of the message to their lives and community.
The power of language to persuade and the precise choice of
words to exploit their inherent emotional appeal have entered the fray
of political campaigns. During the 2000 presidential election, for
example, incumbent George W. Bush reportedly adopted an approach
developed by Republican pollster and tactician Frank Luntz, which
reportedly was “Forget action. Improve your image by revising the way
you talk. Let them eat words” (see Tannen, 2003, p. 30).9 The Repub-
lican strategy was very simple but extremely powerful. In a number
of speeches on the campaign trail, President Bush adopted this strat-
egy. Words such as “children,” “dream,” “hope,” and “love” were used
repeatedly to stir emotions and galvanize support, while other words
9 Georgetown University linguistic professor Deborah Tannen examined the linguistic les-
sons from Republican political strategist Frank Luntz.
130 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
were used to invoke fear.10 The strategy worked, according to Luntz,
because “politics remains an emotional arena, and television has made
fear a salable commodity. But fear alone is not enough. The commodity
Americans most desire—and the one in shortest supply—is hope” (quoted
in Tannen, 2003, p. 30). The strategy’s success appears to have been
the result of a combination of appeals that resonated with would-be
voters, and ensuring that they would be remembered and internalized
through constant repetition.
Influence in Political Campaigns: Conclusions
The lessons from our case study of U.S. political campaigns include the
following:
The objectives of political campaigns typically are quite clear:•
mobilize a majority (or plurality) of voters to vote for (or against) a
candidate by: (1) influencing people to register (or not), (2) influ-
encing registered voters to turn out at the polls (or stay home), and
(3) influence voters to vote for (or against) a candidate.
Political campaigns make substantial efforts to•
understand the political landscape in detail–
differentiate among target audiences (e.g., core supporters who–
are almost sure to vote for a candidate versus others who might
vote for the candidate)
identify the best communication channels to reach audiences–
10 In a speech delivered on education in New Hampshire, for example, Bush followed a
strategy of inculcating fear and promising hope when he reminded parents, “In an Ameri-
can school year there are more than 4,000 rapes or cases of sexual battery, 7,000 robberies
and 11,000 physical attacks involving a weapon. . . . We must restore the American dream
of hope, the diminished hopes of our current system. Safety and discipline are essential.
But when we dream for our children, we dream with higher goals. We want them to love
learning. And we want them to be rich in character and blessed in ideals.” He went further,
“Everyone must have a first-rate education, because there are no second-rate children, no
second-rate dreams” (quoted in Tannen, 2003, p. 30).
Case Study of Influence in political Campaigns 131
craft and test messages that will resonate with each target audi-–
ence through carefully tailored cognitive, affective, or socially
compelling appeals
monitor developments and adapt to campaign twists and turns–
using a variety of methods (focus groups, polling, town halls,
and smaller meetings with the candidate).
Political campaigns primarily communicate messages to their•
audiences through paid (i.e., advertising) and free media (i.e.,
news reporting), and through direct mail, phone banks, and other
means of directly reaching prospective voters.
Although efforts have been made to export U.S.-style political
campaigning approaches to other political societies, it is not at all clear
which concepts, approaches, and lessons of contemporary U.S.-style
political campaigning cleanly transfer to less developed polities such
as those in Iraq and Afghanistan, which might reasonably be adapted
to these environments, and which are irrelevant.11 Nevertheless, the
basic approach described above appears to have substantial relevance to
influence operations and STRATCOMM.
11 For example, the poor security situation in Iraq makes it impossible to hold large rallies
with candidates because they may be targeted by bombers. See Raphaeli, 2004.

133
appEndIx C
Case Studies of Influence in Public Diplomacy1
The traditional American view on national strategic influence opera-
tions is that they are justified only during times of war and should
be gotten rid of as quickly as possible once the war is over. This view
accounts for the rapid demolition of U.S. information activities after
World War I, World War II, and in many ways after the Cold War. 2
It also accounts for the shifting definitions that have been given to a
consistent set of activities over the second half of the 20th century, with
the idea seemingly being that changing the names makes these activi-
ties more palatable to the American people.
In classical terms, strategic influence activities are broadly consid-
ered to be synonymous with public diplomacy or propaganda. The term
“propaganda,” however, has become quite tainted in the United States
and other Western societies insofar as its popular usage assumes that
propaganda must consist entirely of falsehoods, and it is rarely used by
U.S. government officials to describe their activities. 3 This contrasts
with its classical usage, which suggests that propaganda may either be
1 This appendix was authored by Lowell Schwartz.
2 During World War II, the Office of War Information was in charge of all domestic and
international information activities. After the war concluded, this office was liquidated, and
information activities in occupied countries were turned over to the Army. In this capacity,
the Army, under Brigadier General Robert Alexis McClure in Germany, put in place a “de-
Nazification” program, which included rigorous controls on all German domestic media. For
details of this highly successful program, see Ziemke, 1975; Cragin and Gerwehr, 2005, pp.
28–30.
3 According to the commander of the Fourth Psychological Operations Group, “we call our
stuff information and the enemy’s propaganda” (Gerth and Gall, 2005).
134 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
truthful or not, but principally distinguishes between types of propa-
ganda (white, black, or grey) in terms of source disclosure. 4 The “odor”
associated with the term—and the broader sweep of activities conducted
under the umbrella of strategic influence operations—is accountable to
a host of legitimate concerns that relate to trust in government, possible
government manipulation of the press, efforts to mislead the American
public about government policies, and other concerns. Coupled with
such cultural touchstones as Orwellian doublespeak and the highly
congenial environment for conspiracy theories about the effectiveness
of mass “mind control,” “brainwashing,” “perception management,”
and other dubious phenomena,5 revelations about government strate-
gic influence activities have tended to result in a high degree of press,
including elite and public attention and concern whenever they occur. 6
Trust in a government’s credibility is a key issue.
Accordingly, the most common name used today for public
strategic influence activities at the national level is public diplomacy.
According to the State Department, “Public diplomacy seeks to pro-
mote the national interest of the United States through understanding,
informing and influencing foreign audiences.” Perhaps a better defini-
tion is from Hans N. Tuch (1990, p. 3), who defined public diplomacy
as “official government efforts to shape the communications environ-
4 DoD defines “propaganda” as “any form of communication in support of national objec-
tives designed to influence the opinions, emotions, attitudes, or behavior of any group in
order to benefit the sponsor, either directly or indirectly”; “white propaganda” as “propa-
ganda disseminated and acknowledged by the sponsor or by an accredited agency thereof”;
“black propaganda” as “propaganda that purports to emanate from a source other than
the true one; and “grey propaganda” as “propaganda that does not specifically identify any
source” (DoD, 2007).
5 A scholar of brainwashing of American prisoners of war during the Korean War sug-
gested that the popular image of brainwashing as entailing “extensive delusion and excessive
[mental] distortion . . . is a false one” (Schein, 1961).
6 Debates about the objects and limits of strategic influence operations have been extensive
both within and outside the Pentagon. See, for example, Schmitt and Dao, 2002; Schmitt,
2002a, 2002b, 2003; Shanker and Schmitt, 2002, 2004. Gerth and Gall, 2005, details the
furor that arose with the creation of the Office of Strategic Influence in February 2002 and
the December 2005 revelations that the Pentagon was using private firms to assist in the
development of strategic influence campaigns.
Case Studies of Influence in public diplomacy 135
ment overseas in which American foreign policy is played out, in order
to reduce the degree to which misperceptions and misunderstandings
complicate relations between the U.S. and other nations.”
Public diplomacy differs from PA in that PA is generally directed
at informing domestic audiences while public diplomacy is focused
on foreign audiences. Public diplomacy also differs from traditional
diplomacy in two ways. First traditional diplomacy emphasizes private
interactions with foreign governments, while public diplomacy deals
primarily with overt nongovernmental organizations and individuals.
Second, public diplomacy often presents many differing views includ-
ing those of private American individuals and organizations in addi-
tion to official U.S. government views. Public diplomacy can include
activities such as cultural exchanges, educational programs, and media
broadcasts.
Public diplomacy can be considered to be white propaganda, in
which the source is identified correctly and the information tends to
be factual and accurate. U.S. government activities such as the Voice of
America and State Department information programs would fit under
the definition of white propaganda. Strategic influence activities also
include what are known as special activities, another form of national
strategic influence operations.7 Historically, these would fit under the
definition of black propaganda, in which the presumed source of the
information is false or unknown. Black propaganda activities include
clandestine radio stations, the spreading of rumors, and the planting of
newspaper stories.
Case Studies
We used two case studies to illuminate the basic parameters of strate-
gic influence operations. The first case study reviews the United States
strategic influence efforts against the Soviet Union during the early
7 Special activities also might be labeled covert actions and are defined by Sec. 503 (e) of the
National Security Act as “activities conducted by the U.S. Government to influence political,
economic, and military conditions abroad, where it is intended that the role of the United
States Government will not be apparent or acknowledged publicly.”
136 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
years of the Cold War. The second considers U.S. efforts before Opera-
tion Iraqi Freedom to convince world opinion that Hussein’s weapons
of mass destruction (WMD) capability had to be eliminated, either
through international inspectors or through his removal from power.
Each case study will briefly consider the objectives, strategy, intended
audiences, instruments of communications, and methodologies used to
assess the impacts of the strategic influence operations.
Case Study 1: The Strategic Influence Campaign Against the Soviet
Union During the Early Cold War
U.S. strategic influence efforts against the Soviet Union began at
approximately the same time as the grand strategy of containment was
put in place. In many ways, the diplomat George Kennan was the prin-
cipal intellectual architect both of U.S. containment strategy and the
strategic influence efforts that went along with it. 8
For Kennan, political warfare fit into his broader strategy of
reducing Moscow’s power and influence by building up a “counter-
force” to Soviet power. In Kennan’s view, this counterforce consisted
of economic, military, and information activities that would put the
Soviet Union in a disadvantageous position and eventually drive the
Soviet Union to the bargaining table. Kennan’s overall objective of the
campaign then was not necessarily to win the hearts and minds of the
people of Eastern Europe or the Soviet Union, but instead to use pro-
paganda and other means to stir up trouble behind the Iron Curtain,
thereby forcing the Soviet Union to draw on resources to maintain its
hold over the territories it controlled (Grose, 2000; Mitrovich, 2000).
This strategy became especially important after the February 1948
communist coup in Czechoslovakia.
It is worth noting that the limited objectives that Kennan out-
lined for the strategic campaign were not shared by all government
officials. They believed that what they termed “psychological warfare”
could roll back Soviet power and eventually win the Cold War. Their
hope was that a combination of diplomatic, economic, and military
8 In particular, see Kennan, 1946, and “The Sources of Soviet Conduct,” 1947.
Case Studies of Influence in public diplomacy 137
efforts could drive a wedge between the Soviet regime and the Soviet
people, causing a revolt and the removal of the Soviet government.9
Kennan outlined his program for political warfare in a May 1948
memo for the State Department. It contains some features that go well
beyond strategic influence operations, but it is worth mentioning them
in order to get a broader perspective of Kennan’s proposals. Kennan’s
political warfare program involved three broad categories of projects,
some of them overt and some covert. The first set of projects were “lib-
eration committees” made up of private Americans citizens who were
asked to organize selected émigré leaders. These émigré leaders were to
be given access to printing and radio facilities to communicate with
their fellow countrymen behind the Iron Curtain.
This first set of programs was the inspiration for and the organiz-
ing principle behind the National Committee for a Free Europe and
the American Committee for Liberation from Bolshevism, the organi-
zations that sponsored Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberation. Radio
Free Europe and Radio Liberation were short-wave radio stations, run
by émigrés and partly funded by the CIA, which envisioned themselves
as alternative national radio stations to the Communist-run ones. They
presented themselves as what the national radio stations would sound
like if they came from a free country. For example, Radio Hungary
broadcast in Hungarian and had a full slate of news, entertainment,
and commentary programs.
The second set of projects, many of which remain classified, were
not related to communication but rather were outright paramilitary
actions, such as guerrilla units, sabotage forces, and other subversive
activities to undermine Soviet power in Eastern Europe and inside
the Soviet Union itself. These were to be carried out through private
American organizations, which would establish contact with national
underground representatives in free countries and, through these inter-
mediaries, pass on assistance and guidance to resistance movements
behind the Iron Curtain.
The final set of programs were efforts to support indigenous anti-
communist elements in threatened countries of the free world. The
9 This view was prominent in the CIA (see Thomas, 1995).
138 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
principal concern here was the takeover or weakening of democratic
countries by communist forces supported by the Soviet Union. Spe-
cially cited were France and Italy, which remained unstable in 1948.
These efforts were quickly put to work in Italy in an intensive campaign
to assist the Christian Democratic party to an election victory over
the Communist party in Italy. On the overt side, President Truman
broadcast a warning over Voice of America that no economic assis-
tance would be forthcoming if the communists won the election. The
United States also supplied food, and Italian Americans mounted
a letter-writing campaign encouraging their families to support non-
communist parties. On the covert side, the CIA launched a powerful
propaganda effort. The CIA supplied newsprint and information to
pro-Western newspapers. Among the stories the CIA placed in Italian
newspapers were truthful accounts of the brutality of Soviet forces in
the Soviet sector of Germany and the communist takeovers in Poland,
Czechoslovakia, and Hungary. On Election Day, the Christian Demo-
cratic party won a crushing victory, with 48.5 percent plurality of the
vote.
By late 1950, U.S. troops were fighting both North Korean and
Chinese forces on the Korean peninsula. This ongoing conventional
war had a major impact on U.S. information and propaganda policies,
because these polices were increasingly thought of in military terms.10
The wide-ranging term psychological operations gained favor in DoD and
the CIA to describe all diplomatic, economic, military, and ideologi-
cal acts designed to achieve specified objectives.11 PSYOP, according to
advocates, included the information activities of the State Department,
the psychological warfare efforts of DoD, and the covert operations of
the CIA.12 The specific objective that advocates had in mind was “the
eventual rolling back of their [Soviets] illicit conquests” and the win-
10 Parry-Giles (2002, pp. 75–96) calls this “militarized propaganda.”
11 Shawn J. Parry-Giles calls this “militarized propaganda.” See Parry-Giles, 2002, pp.
75–96.
12 In Korea, DoD took the lead engaging in PSYOP in the hopes of undermining Chinese
and Korean troops’ will to fight.
Case Studies of Influence in public diplomacy 139
ning of the Cold War through a combination of diplomatic, informa-
tional, military, economic, and other means.13
Despite all of the talk of taking the offensive against the Soviet
Union, the United States lacked the psychological tools to do so. In a
progress report in 1952, the Truman administration noted that only
“the Voice of America and Radio Free Europe clearly emerged from the
reports as programs which effectively reached the people of either or
both the USSR and the Satellites” (Psychological Strategy Board, 1952).
Covert operations behind the Iron Curtain, despite the vast resources
devoted to them, remained amateurish and deadly only to the agents
who undertook them. Efforts to undermine the Albanian, Romanian,
and Soviet regimes through support of underground movements were
quickly detected and broken up (Thomas, 1995, p. 69).14 The final blow
to this policy was the unwillingness of the United States to support
Hungarian forces revolting against Soviet occupation in 1956.
The unsuccessful revolution in Hungary in 1956 and the shift of
Soviet policy after the death of Stalin led to a new U.S. foreign policy
strategy and a new strategic influence policy. The second Eisenhower
administration moved away from a national security policy based on
promoting revolutionary change (liberation) in the Soviet Union and
instead embraced a new national security policy based on an evolu-
tionary approach to reducing Soviet power. This new evolutionary
approach sought to promote peaceful changes within the Soviet system
that would lead the Soviets to abandon their expansionist policies. It
was understood that this was long-term strategy that might take several
decades to succeed, but there seemed to be little alternative because
Soviet development of atomic weapons during this period precluded a
more aggressive policy.
A new strategic influence strategy was necessary for this foreign
policy approach in order to introduce modern concepts and reform
ideals to social groups within the Soviet Union that could promote
13 This strategy was laid out by Frank Wisner, then deputy head of the CIA, in a memo
(Wisner, 1951).
14 RAND colleague Tom Szayna pointed out that guerrilla movements continued to operate
in the Baltic states and Ukraine into the mid-1950s.
140 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
evolutionary changes. This policy has been termed cultural infiltration
and was defined by the Eisenhower administration as using cultural
contacts to both break down the isolation of the people of Eastern
Europe and to correct the distorted image of the West presented in
communist propaganda. It was hoped that open discussion within the
Soviet Union would spur changes in Soviet policies favorable to the
United States.
The United States government, led by the United States Infor-
mation Agency (USIA), focused its communications with the Soviet
people around several themes. The first theme was people’s capitalism,
which was developed in conjunction with the Advertising Council.15
The term implied that a new type of capitalism has arisen in the United
States allowing average Americans to achieve the highest standard of
living in the world. The theme sought to rebut a central theme of Com-
munist ideology, namely, that workers were exploited by a small ruling
capitalist class for its own gain. Instead, people’s capitalism stressed
that it was the workers themselves who were the capitalists and that
they enjoyed the fruits of their labor. Another theme was the cultural
vibrancy of free and democratic nations, such as the United States. This
theme was designed to undermine Communist claims that American
culture was sterile and dominated by the motive of profits. This view-
point, particularly in Europe, was strongly held, and USIA spent a
great deal of time and effort combating it. At trade fairs, USIA pre-
sented selections of painting and statues showing the United States at
the forefront of modern cultural movements. Although controversial,
USIA believed these exhibits fostered the idea of the United States as
a dynamic and open society with many viewpoints being expressed
through American artwork and culture.
USIA’s target audience for its strategic influence campaigns were
members of the Soviet bureaucracy, the intelligentsia, and Soviet
youth. The first two groups were targeted because they were far enough
removed from the power structure to allow some degree of indepen-
dent thought but still in positions in which their ideas had an over-
15 Also known as the Ad Council, to this day, it produces, distributes, and promotes public
service campaigns on behalf of nonprofit organizations and government agencies.
Case Studies of Influence in public diplomacy 141
all effect on the direction of society. The nature of their professions
(writers, journalists, artists, musicians, scientists, engineers, managers
of industrial trusts, and army officers) taught them to think indepen-
dently, and their economic status made it possible for them to own
radios capable of receiving foreign broadcasts and to attend cultural
events. The Soviet intelligentsia had a strong curiosity about the outside
world, both in terms of the latest fashions and the view of foreigners
on world events.
Soviet youth were also targeted because they were regarded as
vulnerable to outside influences as a result of their increasing alienation
from Communist ideology. The hope was to stimulate comparisons in
young people’s minds between the Communist and Western systems
of political, economic, and social organization. Contact was made by
establishing a relationship with them through youth cultural offerings
in which common ground was more easily gained. One avenue for this
was radio programs devoted to popular American music such as jazz
and rock and roll. Music programs became the most popular format on
Voice of America, and once Soviet youth were hooked, they were more
likely to listen to Voice of America news and commentary programs.
The principal challenge the United States encountered in influ-
encing the target audience was the difficulty it faced in overtly com-
municating with Soviet citizens. The Soviet regime went to extreme
lengths to limit the amount of contact the West had with Soviet citi-
zens: Radio broadcasts were jammed, the circulation of publications
was tightly controlled, and personal travel was limited. The opening
up of the Soviet Union to foreign contact in the mid and late 1950s
provided the United States with an opportunity to communicate with
these groups, of which it took full advantage.
At the beginning of the Cold War almost the only way to com-
municate with Soviet audiences was short-wave radio. After a few years,
even short-wave radio was effectively countered through jamming. The
United States had two short-wave stations—the official one, Voice of
America, and a semiprivate one, Radio Liberty. Radio Liberty was par-
tially funded by the CIA, but its effects on the policies and program-
ming of the stations were limited. Policy was determined by an Ameri-
142 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
can committee that worked in conjunction with Soviet émigré groups
living in the United States and Europe.
By the late 1950s, the Soviet Union was permitting increased
public contact with information from outside the Soviet Union. This
change opened up new instruments for communicating with Soviet
audiences. In 1959, over 2.7 million Soviet citizens visited the Ameri-
can National Exhibition at Sokolniki Park in Moscow. Put together by
USIA, this exhibition emphasized the material prosperity of America;
its open, diverse, and dynamic culture; and the peaceful orientation of
the United States. Cultural exchanges also became an important way
to interact with the Soviet people. In the late 1950s, comedian Bob
Hope, pianist Van Cliburn, the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra,
and the Harlem Globetrotters all visited the Soviet Union. The pur-
pose of these visits was to provide a comparison between the dynamic
culture of the West and the stagnant and authoritarian culture of the
Soviet Union.
The closed nature of Soviet society made it very difficult to judge
the effectiveness of the strategic influence campaigns or even to mea-
sure the size of the audience the campaign was reaching. To overcome
these problems, U.S. policymakers came up with a number of creative
ways to design their influence strategies and to measure their effective-
ness. First, to design their influence strategies and to test their themes,
government officials consulted with leading experts on Soviet affairs
and experts on communications research. Regular meetings were held
with professors at Harvard, MIT, and Princeton, who advised radio
broadcasters on developments in Soviet society, the best ways to reach
the Soviet audience, and what results it was reasonable to expect the
radio stations to achieve. Communications researchers were brought in
to explain the context of communicating with a Soviet audience, how
to grab the attention of the listener, how to communicate with listeners
in their own frame of reference, and how to overcome Soviet citizens’
natural suspicions of a foreign radio station. Radio broadcasts were also
reviewed by exiles who had recently escaped from the Soviet Union.
The intensive radio jamming of the Soviet regime made it dif-
ficult to determine whether anyone could hear the broadcasts at all.
At the beginning, radio station officials had only unscientific meth-
Case Studies of Influence in public diplomacy 143
ods for determining their audiences. They carefully tracked the small
number of letters that arrived at the radio station, although they knew
these numbers tended to be inaccurate because of Soviet mail censor-
ship. They also relied on reports from the U.S. Embassy in Moscow
in order to figure out whether broadcasts could be heard through the
jamming and whether anyone in Moscow was talking about them.
Recently escaped exiles were also a source of information. New escap-
ees were asked whether they had listened to foreign radio stations and
what their reaction was to them.
The radio stations also came up with creative ways to measure
the effectiveness of their programs. The first method they used was
to carefully monitor Soviet media attacks against the United States
and the radio stations. Angry Soviet reactions to the radio programs
were regarded as a positive sign of the impact of the radio station. The
thought was that the Soviet government would not provide free public-
ity to the radio stations if it was not concerned about the influence the
broadcasts were having on Soviet citizens.
The second method, used after the Soviet Union opened up, was
to subtly and discreetly interview Soviet visitors to the West. For exam-
ple, at the Brussels World’s Fair of 1958, 300 Soviet tourists were inter-
viewed by Radio Liberty researchers in order to determine whether
they listened to the radio programs and which ones they enjoyed the
most. One problem was that the sample of subjects interviewed tended
to be from certain geographical areas (for example, Moscow) and was
from only a limited number of socioeconomic groups. To correct for
this problem, the sample was normalized as best as could be done with
Soviet census data. Years later, after the fall of Communism, these fig-
ures were checked against internal surveys done by the Soviet govern-
ment. In general, the two sets of figures corresponded in terms of the
size of the audience, the most popular programs, and the reasons for
listening.16
All of these efforts, however, did not measure whether the United
States was achieving its long-term objectives of promoting peaceful
changes within the Soviet system that would lead it to abandon its
16 See Critchlow, 1995, for a description of Radio Liberty’s methodology and results.
144 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
expansionist policies. At the time, it was very difficult to determine
whether these activities were having any impact at all as the Soviet
regime vacillated between more open and more repressive policies.
Even today, there is a great deal of controversy about the role cultural
infiltration played in end of the Cold War and the fall of the Soviet
Union.17
Despite all of these caveats, there is evidence from recently opened
archives in formerly Communist nations that the policy of cultural
infiltration started under President Eisenhower was a—and perhaps
the—turning point in the Cold War. In Soviet history, the period
between 1954 and 1964 is known as the thaw and is thought of as a
period of relative intellectual openness. Like Gorbachev in the 1980s,
Khrushchev hoped that increased contact with the West would pro-
vide access to Western technology, enhancing economic progress in the
Soviet Union, and reducing international tension.
While this period of openness did not last past Khrushchev’s
removal as party leader in 1964, the intellectual climate of the time
played a pivotal role in the development of the shestidesiatniki, people
in 1960s Russia who were in the avant-garde of the new liberal move-
ment and became protesters and dissidents toward the end of that
decade. This generation, exemplified by Gorbachev, dreamed of recap-
turing the hope and idealism of their youth by launching a new period
of openness with the policies of perestroika and glasnost. These poli-
cies fulfilled the foreign policy goals of the United States as the Soviet
Union peacefully reformed itself, abandoning its expansionist tenden-
cies and embracing a less hostile view of the United States. Ultimately,
17 Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, numerous theories have been put forth to explain
why the Cold War ended. Two main explanations have emerged. One emphasizes the long-
term economic crisis inside the Soviet Union that was exacerbated by high military spend-
ing. According to this school of thought, the Soviet Union could not maintain its economic
and military position, which was collapsing under its own weight. Another group of his-
torians cites the role of ideas that caused a transformation of the outlook of Soviet leaders,
particularly Gorbachev. This group believes that the Cold War ended because the Soviet
government and people lost faith in the social and economic system of the Soviet Union and
wanted to embrace a more Western/modern outlook. The two explanations are, obviously,
not mutually exclusive, and most analysts of the subject seem to believe that there are ele-
ments of truth in each.
Case Studies of Influence in public diplomacy 145
the modern social concepts of the West could not coexist with the
totalitarian mindset of the Soviet state, causing its complete collapse
in 1991.
To summarize, our case study of strategic influence activities
during the Cold War suggests the following:
Understanding and influencing “captive” populations requires•
great creativity, patience, and somewhat dubious methods in light
of the biases and lack of representativeness in the resulting data.
In retrospect, there is evidence that innovation and work-arounds•
to deal with the lack of access to target audiences, and the result-
ing lack of detailed data, actually seem to have worked.
Cultural infiltration efforts appear to have had greater success•
in influencing attitudes than most realized, although they also
benefited in large measure from Krushchev’s opening the Soviet
Union to the West.
Sometimes the benefits of strategic influence campaigns only•
become apparent years after the campaign was inaugurated.
Changing people’s basic attitudes requires a long and sustained
effort, and instantaneous results generally should not be expected.
In the case of the Cold War, a generational time scale was required
for these efforts to manifest themselves in changes that ultimately
led to the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
Case Study 2: National Strategic Influence Operations Before the
Second Gulf War
On December 28, 2001, General Tommy Franks visited President
Bush at his Crawford, Texas, ranch. In the meeting, Gen. Franks out-
lined a war plan for invading Iraq and removing the regime of Hussein
(Woodward, 2004, p. 53). This was followed on January 29, 2002, by
President Bush’s State of the Union Address, the first since the attacks
of September 11. In that speech, President Bush labeled Iraq as part of
an “Axis of Evil,” which he characterized as states seeking weapons of
mass destructions that might provide these arms to terrorists (Wood-
ward, 2004, p. 87).
146 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
This speech was another chapter in the complex history of U.S.
relations with the Hussein regime. Over a 12-year period, from the end
of the first Gulf War to the beginning of the second, the United States
had pursued a dual policy of containing Iraq and attempting to over-
throw it.18 These dual policies had been followed by three presidential
administrations until the shock of the terrorist attacks on September 11
spurred the Bush administration to move more forcefully in the direc-
tion of a preemptive attack on Iraq.
The Axis of Evil speech also marked the beginning of a 15-month
strategic influence campaign to convince regional/Arab opinion and
the international community that the Hussein regime was a global
threat that could not be deterred or contained. This campaign was only
one piece of the U.S. government’s overall influence campaign, which
was directed at multiple audiences, including domestic public opinion,
foreign governments, the Iraqi people, and audiences in the region and
in Europe. Our case study will consider only the public diplomacy
piece targeted at regional and international audiences.19 However, it is
important to note that there was (accidentally or intentionally) consid-
erable overlap among the strategic influence campaigns directed at the
various groups. Twenty-four-hour news coverage by global media firms
ensures that messages that might be intended only for one particular
audience reverberated almost instantaneously around the world.
Objectives
One early difficulty that the strategic influence campaign had was uni-
fying key government officials on the objectives of the campaign. In
late August 2002, the administration seemed divided over its strategy
for Iraq. In one camp was Vice President Cheney, who on August 26,
2002, gave a speech outlining the need for war to remove the Hussein
regime in Iraq because “a return of [UN] inspectors would provide
18 Peltz et al., 2005, document this dual policy, which involved, on the regime change side,
covert attempts to sponsor a coup against Saddam Hussein and, on the containment side,
international sanctions, WMD inspections, and no-fly zones.
19 There also may have been covert attempts to sway regional and international audiences
that have not been revealed.
Case Studies of Influence in public diplomacy 147
no assurance whatsoever of his [Hussein’s] compliance with UN reso-
lutions” (Cheney, 2002). During this same time period, Secretary of
State Powell said in an interview that the president believed that the
UN weapon inspectors should return to Iraq. If media reports are to be
believed, Powell had grave reservations about the war, reservations that
he outlined for President Bush in an August 5, 2002, meeting. Alleg-
edly, Powell advised working through the UN and not rushing to war,
although he reportedly did not openly tell the president, “Don’t do it”
(Woodward, 2004, pp. 148–151).
This apparent deep divide forced officials in charge of the strate-
gic influence campaign to push multiple—and conflicting—objectives
and messages. 20 The first objective was to frame the debate and to define
the threat posed by Iraq. The goal was to show that Hussein’s regime
was a global threat that could not be deterred or contained. This objec-
tive emphasized the need for war because efforts by the international
community during the 1990s had failed to deal with the threat posed
by the Iraq regime. This objective was followed by a second one for
the strategic influence campaign: the need to communicate that the
United States intended to liberate and not conquer the Iraq people.
The third objective, however, somewhat contradicted the other
two. This objective was to build an international coalition to deal with
the Iraqi threat. The goal was to build support for U.S. policy by show-
ing that the United States was consulting with international partners
about how to deal with continuing Iraqi defiance of United Nations
resolutions to disarm. The problem was that many members of the
international community were unconvinced of the need for a war with
Iraq, instead emphasizing the need to return UN inspectors to the
country to ensure that all Iraqi’s WMD had been destroyed. Hence the
strategic influence campaign was caught on the horns of a dilemma. It
had to build support for a war with Iraq while at the same time show-
ing that the United States was working with other nations, many of
which were against any military action, in crafting an international
solution to the Iraqi problem.
20 This section draws on interviews and a memo provided to one of the authors by officials
at the Department of State, the National Security Council, and DoD.
148 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
These dueling objectives led to significant problems in coordi-
nating strategy, with various U.S. government departments highlight-
ing the objectives with which they were most comfortable. The State
Department tended to focus on building an international coalition,
with a reluctance to believe up until the last moment that war was
inevitable. DoD, on the other hand, focused its strategic influence cam-
paign on preparing for the invasion of Iraq, often publicly announcing
steps that made it seem that the United States had prejudged the need
for a war, undermining attempts to build an international coalition.
Strategy and Themes
The United States had somewhat different strategies for its public diplo-
macy efforts in the Middle East and Europe. In the Middle East, there
was an early recognition that the people of the region would not sup-
port an invasion of Iraq. Instead, U.S. strategy concentrated on gaining
access to key military bases in the region, ensuring no support for the
Hussein regime during the war, and gaining public support for build-
ing a democratic and free Iraq after the conflict was over. The central
message to the Arab world was that a U.S. invasion to remove Hussein
was inevitable and the world should unite around providing a better
life for the Iraqi people after the war. In their efforts to gain Arab sup-
port for U.S. policies, the strategic influence campaign sought to com-
municate a positive vision of what Iraq would look like when Hussein
was gone from power.
In Europe, the strategic influence campaign had a somewhat dif-
ferent strategy. Polling by the State Department research group showed
that European publics would support an international campaign
against Iraq but not an American one. The goal then for the strategic
influence campaign in Europe was to show that the United States was
leading an international effort to enforce at least a dozen UN resolu-
tions stipulating that Iraq must disarm. It was thought that European
audiences wanted to know that the United States respected interna-
tional laws and that U.S. statements were factually correct about Iraqi
WMD programs and support for terrorist groups . European audiences
in essence wanted evidence to convince them that the Iraqi regime was
a threat to world peace and that the United States was following the
Case Studies of Influence in public diplomacy 149
proper international legal process for using military force. U.S. govern-
ment officials believed that European public opinion could best be per-
suaded by highlighting Hussein’s horrifying human rights record and
the similarities between the Iraqi government and totalitarian govern-
ments in Europe’s past.
Instruments
A full accounting of the instruments used to prosecute the U.S. stra-
tegic influence campaign is unlikely until historians are able to go
through currently classified government records. However, we can get
some idea of the effort through various documents that were publicly
released. In October 2002, the director of the CIA released an unclas-
sified report on Iraq’s WMD programs that concluded:
Iraq has continued its weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
programs in defiance of UN resolutions and restrictions. Bagh-
dad has chemical and biological weapons as well as missiles with
ranges in excess of UN restrictions; if left unchecked, it probably
will have a nuclear weapon during this decade (Central Intelli-
gence Agency, 2002).
Set up in January 2003, the White House Office of Global Com-
munications (OGC) had the mission of coordinating U.S. government
messages designed to inform audiences abroad about the U.S. govern-
ment’s policies and priorities. In January 2003, OGC produced a book-
let called “Apparatus of Lies,” which reviewed Iraq’s “disinformation
and propaganda campaigns.” OGC also produced widely distributed
documents on Hussein’s use of torture and mass executions.
Another method the U.S. government used to communicate its
message was via public presentations by major officials. One of the
most important public presentations was Secretary of State Powell’s
February 2003, 76-minute speech to the UN Security Council out-
lining U.S. evidence of Iraqi WMD programs and Iraqi attempts to
derail UN weapons inspectors. CIA Director George Tenet sat directly
behind Powell during his testimony, adding symbolic weight to the
information presentation. In the Middle East, Ambassador Christo-
pher Ross, special advisor to the State Department on public diplo-
150 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
macy, appeared on numerous television and radio programs. In Arabic,
Ambassador Ross sought to explain and defend U.S. policies toward
the Middle East. Finally, the National Intelligence Council released
an unclassified summary of the most recent National Intelligence Esti-
mate on Iraq’s WMD program.
The State Department set up its own Iraq working group to pre-
pare public diplomacy measures in the run-up to the conflict. The Iraq
working group offered public diplomacy guidance for country teams
in key regions. However, records later showed that there was lim-
ited follow-through, because in-country teams ignored the guidance
provided. There is also some evidence that DoD failed to coordinate
PA/public diplomacy efforts with the State Department. In October
2002, the U.S. Central Command (CENTCOM) sent a PA team to
the Middle East to begin preparations for media operations during the
war. No State Department personnel were asked to participate.
Measuring the Impact of the Strategic Influence Campaign
In the months preceding and immediately after the war, numerous
surveys measured world opinion on the war in Iraq. These surveys also
provided some indications of whether the United States achieved the
objectives it laid out before the start of the war (Pew Research Center,
2004). The United States had somewhat different objectives for its stra-
tegic influence campaigns in the Middle East than for those in Europe.
To recap, in the Middle East the United States sought to gain access
to key military bases in the region, ensure no support for the Hussein
regime during the war, and gain public support for building a demo-
cratic and free Iraq after the conflict was over. In Europe, the United
States tried to persuade European public opinion that U.S. actions in
Iraq were part of an international effort to force Hussein’s regime to
abide by UN resolutions.
The United States had some success with the first two of its goals
in the Middle East. Although polling conducted by the Pew Global
Attitudes Project in April–May 2003 revealed that Kuwaitis thought
that their country’s decision to provide the United States and allies
with access to bases had been the right one but that 63 percent of the
Turkish public felt that it had been the wrong decision, the United
Case Studies of Influence in public diplomacy 151
States did gain access to key military bases during the conflict and no
government in the region openly backed the Iraqi regime during the
conflict. 21 Pew’s polling also revealed that most Arab and Muslim pub-
lics believed that the use of military force against countries that had
not actually attacked first was rarely or never justified, and that Arab
and Muslim nations’ decisions not to use force against Iraq had been
the right one. 22
The United States was less successful convincing Arab opinion to
support U.S. postwar goals or that Iraqis were better off after the inva-
sion. Pew’s spring 2003 survey revealed that majorities in Nigeria, Leb-
anon, and Kuwait believed that Iraqis would be better off, majorities
in Indonesia, Pakistan, Jordan, Morocco, and the Palestinian Author-
ity—and a plurality of Turks—did not. 23 Most polling suggests that
since the end of combat operations and the discovery that there were in
fact no Iraqi WMD—and as a result of the emergence of a protracted
sectarian conflict in Iraq—optimism about the lot of Iraqis within
Arab and Muslim publics has plummeted.
21 The question asked in Kuwait and Turkey was: “On the subject of Iraq, did (survey coun-
try) make the right decision or the wrong decision to allow the U.S. and its allies to use bases
for military action in Iraq?” (Pew Research Center, 2003, Q.22b).
22 The question was: “Do you think that using military force against countries that may
seriously threaten our country, but have not attacked us, can often be justified, sometimes
be justified, rarely be justified, or never be justified?” (Pew Research Center, 2003, Q.21).
Sixty-five percent of Jordanians and 57 percent of respondents in the Palestinian Authority
said they thought that the use of force in such a circumstance was never justified, and majori-
ties in Indonesia, Lebanon, Kuwait, and Morocco thought it was rarely or never justified.
When asked “On the subject of Iraq, did (survey country) make the right decision or the
wrong decision to not use military force against Iraq?” (Pew Research Center, 2003, Q.22c),
supermajorities of 70 percent or better in Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Lebanon, Jordan, and
Morocco said that their country had made the right decision not to use military force.
23 In a similar vein, when asked whether the Middle East region was likely to become more
democratic as a result of the removal of Hussein, only in Nigeria and Kuwait did majorities
indicate that they thought the Middle East would become somewhat or much more demo-
cratic; majorities in Indonesia, Lebanon, Jordan, and the Palestinian Authority said that they
expected no change whatsoever. The question was: “Now that Saddam Hussein has been
removed from power by the U.S. and its allies, do you think the Middle East region will
become much more democratic, somewhat more democratic, or will there be no change in
the region?” (Pew Research Center, 2003, Q.26).
152 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
In Europe, the United States had comparably mixed results. Ulti-
mately, few European governments publicly supported the invasion of
Iraq, and public opinion surveys in the spring of 2003 showed that
they were generally on firm ground: 80 percent or more of the French,
German, Italian, and Russian publics thought that their country had
made the right decision not to use military force against Iraq. 24 In a
similar vein, 62 percent of Spaniards thought their government’s deci-
sion to use force in Iraq had been the wrong one. 25 Nevertheless, while
fewer than 30 percent of Russians subscribed to this belief, more than
70 percent of those polled in Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy,
and Spain said that they thought that the Iraqis would be better off as
a result.
The decline in favorable opinion about the United States may
partly be the result of public perceptions in Europe of the accuracy
and truthfulness of U.S. charges before the war; the lack of WMD in
Iraq undermined one of the key justifications for the war. Pew’s poll-
ing reveals that by March 2004, fewer than 25 percent in France, Ger-
many, Russia, Turkey, Pakistan, Jordan, and Morocco said that U.S.
and British leaders had been misinformed about WMD, whereas, with
the exception of Morocco, more than 60 percent in these publics said
that U.S. and British leaders had lied. 26 There also was a rising belief
across Europe that the United States did not take into account the
interests of other countries in its foreign policies: majorities in Great
Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Russia, and Turkey expressed
24 The question was: “On the subject of Iraq, did (survey country) make the right decision
or the wrong decision to not use military force against Iraq?” (Pew Research Center, 2003,
Q.22c).
25 The question was: “On the subject of Iraq, did (survey country) make the right deci-
sion or the wrong decision to use military force against Iraq?” (Pew Research Center, 2003,
Q.22a).
26 In Morocco, 48 percent expressed the view that U.S. and British leaders had lied. The
question was: “Before the war, the U.S. and Britain claimed that Iraq had weapons of mass
destruction. These weapons have yet to be found. Why do you think they made this claim?
Was it mostly because U.S. and British leaders were themselves misinformed by bad intelli-
gence, or was it mostly because U.S. and British leaders lied to provide a reason for invading
Iraq?” (Pew Research Center, 2003, Q.27).
Case Studies of Influence in public diplomacy 153
the view that the United States considered the interests of other coun-
tries little or not at all. 27 State Department reports on foreign media
reaction to the end of the hunt for WMD yielded similar findings,
with one of the reports’ main conclusions about foreign press coverage
being that while “unharmed politically at home . . . [President Bush’s]
credibility [was] shaken overseas” (U.S. Department of State, 2005).
To conclude, our case study of the run-up to Operation Iraqi
Freedom suggests mixed results:
The United States had some success with British and a few other•
European publics but generally was unable to overcome opposi-
tion from the French, German, Russian, and many other Euro-
pean publics. 28
Although the United States and its coalition partners were gener-•
ally successful in securing bases and keeping Arab regimes from
supporting Hussein, they also were largely unsuccessful in their
efforts to build support from “the Arab street.”
Influence in Public Diplomacy: Conclusions
The main conclusions that we drew from our two case studies are the
following:
The United States historically has had great difficulties conduct-•
ing effective strategic influence operations in peacetime. These
operations are viewed by the domestic public at home with great
suspicion, and they have a mixed track record abroad.
27 The question was: “In making international policy decisions, to what extent do you think
the United States takes into account the interests of countries like (survey country)—a great
deal, a fair amount, not too much or not at all?” (Pew Research Center, 2003, Q.10). More-
over, Pew’s polling shows a declining belief that the United States took into account the
interests of other countries in most of these countries between the summer of 2002 and
spring of 2003.
28 It is worth mentioning that support for the U.S. military action in Iraq at home and
abroad has since substantially declined.
154 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
The goal of public diplomacy is to reduce misperceptions and•
misunderstandings that may complicate relations between the
United States and other nations by providing factual and truthful
information.
The specific objectives of strategic influence campaigns and the•
various constraints that are encountered greatly shape both the
preferred strategy and the outcomes.
For strategic influence operations to succeed, substantial knowl-•
edge about a target audience’s preexisting attitudes and informa-
tion environment is needed. Moreover, there are situations in
which target audiences are unlikely to be persuaded no matter
how great an effort is undertaken, especially when the message
contradicts deeply held values or beliefs.
Successful strategic influence efforts typically are viewed as•
requiring unity and repetition of a common basic message that
is reasonably congenial to target audiences. When policymakers
or their statements contradict one another, it is likely to confuse
the target audience and reduce the effectiveness of the campaign.
Also, statements that are viewed by audiences as not credible are
most likely to be rejected outright.
155