ChaptEr thrEE
Influencing Groups and Networks
The next level up from the individual involves influencing the behavior
of individuals in groups and group-level dynamics, decisions, and other
behaviors.1 As will be shown, the scholarly literature that addresses
influence and decisionmaking processes within groups and social net-
works provides a different set of intellectual foundations, and some of
the insights from this research illuminate what may constitute addi-
tional opportunities for influencing such processes. 2
Behavioral Perspectives Regarding Groups
As with the literature related to individual-level attitudes and behavior,
the scholarship related to how people in groups influence one another
and the factors that affect group dynamics and group decision out-
comes is quite vast. The following is meant to provide a brief overview
of some of the more important work in these areas:
Social Power Theory.• Social psychologist Bertram Raven has
focused much of his research on defining and elaborating the
concept of “social power” and on the development of a power/
1 The term group dynamics was coined by the social psychologist Kurt Lewin, and it has
been a recurring topic of scholarly inquiry for psychologists and sociologists. For a review of
Lewin’s contributions to the discussion on group dynamics, see Smith, 2001.
2 Among the most frequently cited works on networks in national security affairs is Arquilla
and Ronfeldt, 2001.
30 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
interaction model of interpersonal influence. 3 The model holds
that there are six bases of social power—informational, coercive,
reward, legitimacy, expert, and referent power—in addition to
several other, less direct methods of influence that a planner can
employ in influencing a target audience, including manipulating
environmental variables that constrain the audience and invoking
or reducing the power of third parties (Raven, 1990, pp. 496–
504). In this model, planners seeking to influence another party
assess both their own motivations and those of the target audience,
their available power bases, the costs of available influence strate-
gies, and necessary preparations for the influence attempt. Then
they make a choice regarding the mode of influence and assess
the effects of the influence effort (Raven, 1990, pp. 504–511). In
a similar fashion, the target audience also may assess motivations
for resisting the influence effort and other related factors (Raven,
1990, pp. 511–513). The application of social power theory to
influence tactics has expanded beyond Raven’s original domain
of interpersonal influence to intragroup and intergroup settings
(see Bruins, 1999).
Cialdini’s Influence Model.• Social psychologist Robert B. Cial-
dini (2000, 2006) identified what he described as six “weapons of
influence”: (1) reciprocation, the tendency for people to return a
favor; (2) commitment, the tendency for people to honor a com-
mitment; (3) social proof, the tendency for people to behave as
they observe others behaving; (4) authority, the tendency to obey
authority figures; (5) likeability, i.e., people are more easily per-
suaded by those whom they like; and (6) scarcity, perceptions of
scarcity generate demand. Cialdini also argued for the “foot-in-
the-door” phenomenon, which suggests that if small efforts at
influence are successful, they can also be used for large efforts (see
Cialdini and Schroeder, 1976). 4
3 See, for example, French, and Raven, 1959; Raven, 1990.
4 A 1983 meta-analysis of foot-in-the-door research found that the phenomenon, although
replicable, was weak and not nearly as robust as had been assumed, and that nearly half of
Influencing Groups and networks 31
Social Exchange Theory.• The social exchange theory of psycholo-
gists J. W. Thibaut and H. H. Kelley (1959) is a general theory of
interpersonal relations and group functioning that bases its analy-
sis of social interactions on game theoretic assumptions regarding
how people in groups influence each other through the exchange
of rewards and costs, and the availability of resources.5 In this
theory of interdependence, individuals try to maximize rewards
and minimize costs, and they choose to develop relationships with
others on the basis of their assessments of the expected outcome of
developing a relationship relative to other possible relationships. 6
Appeals to Fear and Attitude Change.• One of the unique aspects
of influence in military operations is the ever-present possibility
of coercion through the threat or use of force, and there is some
research on the efficacy of appeals to fear in communications.
Hovland and his associates (1953), for example, provide some of
the earliest theoretical analyses of fear arousal and persuasion
(also, see Janis and Feshbach, 1953). Subsequent work has sug-
gested that low and high levels of fear can interfere with the pro-
cessing of messages and that moderate levels of fear may lead to
the most effective persuasion (see Higbee, 1969; Keller and Block,
1996). Other work has elaborated on Hovland’s original formula-
tion and has sought to understand how the severity of a threat, its
probability of occurrence, and the availability of coping strategies
affect the persuasiveness of communications.7 We did not find
any individual-level research distinguishing between short- and
long-term effects of threats or coercion or the extent to which
postcoercion resentment might affect long-term compliance.
the studies either produced no effect or the opposite effects from those desired. See Beaman
et al., 1983.
5 The authors updated their model in Kelley and Thibaut, 1978.
6 The theory also considers such issues as the cohesiveness of groups, social power, and
rivalry (Gladstone, 1961).
7 Rogers and Mewborn (1976) elaborate on the work of Hovland, Janis, and Kelley (1953).
In addition, Das, de Wit, and Stroebe (2003) suggest that fear can serve as a motivator for
those who feel vulnerable.
32 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
Coercive Persuasion and Thought Reform.• Finally, psychologists
Kurt Lewin and Edgar Schein separately considered what may
be the most extreme types of group influence, i.e., coercive per-
suasion and thought reform (“brainwashing”) programs such as
those used by the Chinese on Korean War prisoners of war. This
work suggests that changing attitudes involves three distinct steps:
(1) “unfreezing” current attitudes, (2) changing the attitudes, and
(3) “refreezing” the new attitudes. Schein and Lifton found that
even though these programs were conducted in an environment
in which the Chinese tightly controlled virtually all aspects of
the prisoner-of-war environment—including whether prison-
ers would live or die—the effects tended to be ephemeral at best
(Schein, 1959, 1961; Lifton, 1961; also, Ofshe, 1992).
Before proceeding, it is worth mentioning that many of the
individual-level behavioral theories of influence and persuasion dis-
cussed earlier also are highly relevant to the question of an individual’s
influence within a group setting. For example, the relative power of
individuals that is addressed in Raven’s social power/interaction theory
also has been examined by social choice theorists, who have sought
to quantify the distribution of power in committees and other small
groups in terms of a power index (see Shapley and Shubik, 1954).
Among the most prominent of these is the role of opinion leadership, a
key construct that applies not just in small group settings but scales up
to the level of mass public opinion.
Opinion leaders and opinion leadership have been among the
most important concepts related to the influence of key individuals
within groups, networks, communities, and larger society since the
time of John Stuart Mill. 8 Much of the scholarship in this area relies
on Elihu Katz and Paul Lazarsfeld’s (1955) two-step theory of commu-
8 As Mill observed: “The mass do not now take their opinions from dignitaries in Church
or State, from ostensible leaders, or from books. Their thinking is done for them by men
much like themselves, addressing them or speaking in their name” (Mill, 1869, p. 13). Key
works on opinion leadership include Lazarsfeld, Berelson, and Gaudet, 1944; Lasswell, 1948,
p. 37; Katz and Lazarsfeld, 1955; Rogers and Shoemaker, 1971; Willner and Willner, 1965;
Burt, 1999; Valente and Davis, 1999.
Influencing Groups and networks 33
nications, which seeks to explain the diffusion of innovations, ideas,
or commercial products. In this model, opinions flow from opinion
leaders to other individuals, and opinion leaders can be neighbors, rela-
tives, coworkers, or friends in an individual’s social system or political
or other leaders whose views are reported in the media.9
Clearly, innumerable other individual-level characteristics that are
discussed in the individual-level literature on persuasion, e.g., likeabil-
ity or expertise, also can constitute sources of influence within group
settings.10
Shifting topics, a recent review of the scholarly literature on group
performance and decisionmaking offers a number of insights of poten-
tial interest to planners of influence operations:
Group performance can be affected by such factors as inefficien-•
cies in group decisionmaking processes, whether they resort to
brainstorming, the motivation of members to contribute to group
performance or to engage in “social loafing,” the extent and
nature of agreement on group goals, and the level of stress (Kerr
and Tindale, 2004, especially pp. 625–632). In some cases, such
as the level of stress facing an adversary decisionmaking group,
the planner may be able to manipulate these factors to his or her
advantage.
Additional work suggests that although groups tend to outper-•
form individuals in many domains, they also can fall prey to the
same heuristic-based biases found at the individual level, and
groups can either attenuate or exacerbate these individual-level
decision biases (see Kerr and Tindale, 2004, p. 634, for a review
of this work). Understanding and being able to manipulate such
decision biases may constitute another source of influence.
9 For three sophisticated scholarly works that share much in their view of opinion leader-
ship in public opinion formation, see Neuman, 1986; Zaller, 1992a; Brody, 1992. Also of
interest are Rasinski, Tyler, and Fridkin, 1985; Childers, 1986; Burt, 1999.
10 Also worth mentioning is that a number of scholars have viewed groups as passing
through different stages, from initial formation and selection of leaders to disestablishment
of the group. We do not address this subject.
34 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
Also of interest to planners is that groups that share information•
can improve the quality of their decisions, but that groups tend to
be less-than-optimal users of information and often ignore infor-
mation that is not widely shared among group members, which
can lead to failures in uncovering hidden insights (Kerr and Tin-
dale, 2004, pp. 636–638). Efforts to influence the information
sets of group members or their willingness to share information
may be another fruitful area.
Some work, furthermore, suggests that group members who are•
“cognitively central,” i.e., who have the highest degree of overlap
between the information they hold and that held by other group
members, also tend to dominate consensus-based group decision-
making outcomes. Understanding which members of a group are
central information brokers also may be important to planners
(Kerr and Tindale, 2004, p. 638).11
It also is important to note that some individual-level character-
istics that have an important influence on which messages individuals
attend to and which they are likely to accept also have been shown to
be group characteristics (e.g., ideology). This insight can enable plan-
ners to tailor their influence campaigns and messages to distinct target
groups, each of which consists of relatively homogeneous—on some
basic characteristics—individuals (see, for example, Feld and Grof-
man, 1988).
Rational Choice Perspectives Regarding Groups
The literature concerning rational choice focuses on how individuals
promote their interests within larger social or institutional settings and
constraints, including within groups. Accordingly, it should be little
surprise that the analysis of group deliberations and decisionmaking
has been a prominent subject for theorists who have sought to under-
11 A related finding from research in positive political theory (Gilligan and Krehbiel, 1989)
suggests that experts, not those whose preferences are outliers, are granted the power by
group members to shape group debates and outcomes.
Influencing Groups and networks 35
stand the factors associated with the resolution of group-level decision-
making processes and outcomes—whether micro-level outcomes, such
as debates or elections within small committees, or elections and other
macro-level political epiphenomena.
A recent review of social choice, rational choice, and positive
political theory (i.e., the study of politics using formal methods such as
game theory) divided these models into two classes—direct collective
preference models and indirect game-theoretic models:12
In its simplest form, [rational choice theory] assumes an indi-
vidual has well-defined preferences over a given set of alterna-
tives and chooses any alternative with the property that no other
alternative in the set is strictly more preferred by her; that is, the
individual chooses a “best” alternative. In politics, however, it is
rarely the case that only one individual’s preferences are relevant
for any collective choice; even dictators are sensitive to at least
some others in the polity. Consequently, the first family of models
in positive political theory, which we associate with the methods
of social choice, examines the possibility that individual prefer-
ences are directly aggregated into a collective, or social, preference
relation which, as in the theory of individual decision making, is
then maximized to yield a set of best alternatives (where “best”
is defined as being most preferred with respect to the collective
preference relation). If a set of best alternatives for a given method
of aggregation necessarily exists, then we have an internally con-
sistent model of observed collective choices as elements from this
set analogous to the model of individual choice, and it is in prin-
ciple possible to ascertain whether the model does or does not
provide a good explanation for what is observed in the real world
of politics.
12 Among the more notable contributions in this area are the historically important 18th and
19th century works of de Borda, Condorcet, and Dodgson (Lewis Carroll) and a number of
works that created the new area of social choice theory, including von Neumann and Mor-
genstern, 1944; Black, 1948; Arrow, 1951; Shapley and Shubik, 1954; Downs, 1957; Black,
1958; Schelling, 1960 (rev. 1980); Buchanan and Tullock, 1962; Riker, 1972, 1986; Sen,
1977; Merrill and Grofman, 1999.
36 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
In [the] second family of models [indirect game theoretic models],
individuals are no longer passive participants in the collective
decision making, but rather make individual choices of behav-
ior that then jointly determine the collective choice of outcome.
These models then naturally fall into the methodology of game
theory. . . . Unlike direct preference aggregation models, the game
theory models do not presume that collective outcomes are best
elements relative to some underlying social preference relation.
Rather, they are the consequences of a set of mutually consistent
individual decisions, within a given game. It is thus the compo-
sition of preferences and game structure that explains collective
choices in this family of models and not, as in the first family, the
application of an aggregation rule to preferences per se. (Austen-
Smith and Banks, 1998, 260–262).13
Social choice theorists, therefore, generally look to individ-
ual decisions as the source of collective political outcomes, and they
assume that individuals operate according to the logic of their own
perceived rational self-interest. Put another way, group decisionmaking
outcomes—whether at the small group or societal level—are the result
of self-oriented actions that combine to yield collective outcomes.14
Much work in social choice and spatial politics (the representation
and analysis of political actors’ positions in spatial terms) has focused on
predicting group decisionmaking outcomes for a single issue, a vote on
leadership of a committee, for example, or a policy.15 The basic building
blocks for rational choice models of politics for single issues are rela-
tively modest: a specification of the relevant individuals or groups; a set
of feasible alternatives or outcomes; and for each individual or group, a
description of preferences over the set of outcomes (Austen-Smith and
Banks, 1998, p. 263). Theoretical and empirical work also converges
13 Game theoretic models generally fall into two classes, cooperative and noncooperative.
For a discussion of the differences between these models, see Kahan and Rapoport, 1984.
14 For excellent reviews of positive political theory/rational choice theory, see Austen-Smith
and Banks, 1998; Amadae and Bueno de Mesquita, 1999.
15 Consideration of linked issues tends to generate a range of possible outcomes rather than
a specific outcome. See, for example, Feld and Grofman, 1986.
Influencing Groups and networks 37
on the finding that institutional constraints—such as group decision-
making procedures, including agenda control, voting rules, and veto
power—also have a powerful influence on group decision outcomes;
it is, therefore, also important for planners to understand the institu-
tional and other constraints on decisionmaking.16
The following finding is of special interest to planners (it echoes
the work of social choice and spatial voting theorists): Some empirical
research on group decisionmaking for single issues suggests that the
preferred position of the median group member tends to dominate in
groups using consensus-based and democratic decisionmaking process-
es.17 Put another way, in many democratic and consensus-based group
decisionmaking environments, the best prediction of a group’s decision
will be the position of the average (median) group member or, when
scaled up to mass publics, the median voter.18 This insight suggests that
an influence strategy that aims to shift the position of the median fre-
quently will be the most desirable one.19
Moreover, in many cases, planners also may wish to combine
behavioral-empirical and rational choice–theoretical approaches. For
example, by using survey or other data, we can understand the rela-
tionship between subgroup characteristics and policy preferences, the
relative salience of various policy issues (e.g., security, electric power,
or economic development), or other parameters of interest for rational
choice modeling efforts. Put another way, empirical work can inform
16 Voting rules can impose the constraint of requiring a dictator’s or veto wielder’s assent, for
example, or plurality, majority, or unanimous consent.
17 Empirical work cited by Kerr and Tindale in support of median voter outcomes includes
Crott, Szilvas, and Zuber, 1991; Davis, 1996. For contrasting reviews of the empirical sup-
port for the median voter theorem, see Romer and Rosenthal, 1979; Bueno de Mesquita and
Stokman, 1994.
18 The median voter theorem is one of the most important concepts coming out of the social
choice literature and was originally articulated in Black, 1948, and popularized in Downs,
1957.
19 As will be described later in our discussion of agent-based rational choice or expected util-
ity models, for cases in which votes are not taken, weights can be assigned to stakeholders
or groups to reflect their relative capabilities and their willingness to use these capabilities
to promote their preferred outcomes. This process makes fairly accurate forecasts of policy
outcomes.
38 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
rational choice modeling and vice versa, and each potentially has some-
thing to contribute to the planning of influence operations (Austen-
Smith and Banks, 1998, p. 261).
Influence in Social Networks
Closely related to influence within groups and the role of social norms
is an understanding of the political, military, tribal, religious, patron-
age, resource allocation, and other social networks that can promote
different norms and can constitute the backbone of community, deci-
sionmaking, control, normative behaviors, and influence in a society.
Of particular interest to planners is an understanding of the degree of
influence that leadership nodes in these networks exercise over their
followers or subordinates and, more generally, how power flows within
social networks.
One of the more promising areas of research related to influence
in networks is work on the diffusion of innovations within networks. 20
The basic premise of this area of research is that new ideas and practices
spread through interpersonal contacts, largely consisting of interper-
sonal communications. 21 This research also highlights the importance
of opinion leaders and suggests that the degree of influence wielded by
an opinion leader is predicated in part on the potential adopters’ assess-
ment of the leader’s credibility and trustworthiness. This research also
suggests that early adopters of innovations may be marginal members
of a network who provide bridges between networks (in social network
analysis [SNA] vernacular, they are high in “betweenness”) but that it
is only when these innovations come to the attention of opinion leaders
that diffusion accelerates. Some of this work suggests that a three-step
process can be used to accelerate the diffusion of ideas in a network:
20 See Rogers and Cartano, 1962; Rogers, 1979, 1995; Valente, 1993, 1995, 1996; Valente
and Davis, 1999. Another work dealing with contagion or the spread of ideas within a net-
work is Burt, 1999.
21 For a review of this literature and a very useful network analysis of the critical role of
opinion leaders in the diffusion of innovations within a network, see Valente and Davis,
1999, pp. 56–57.
Influencing Groups and networks 39
(1) identify the most influential members of a community, (2) match
opinion leaders to the community members who are closest to them
in the chain of information flow, and (3) assign “isolates” (individuals
identified by no one as an opinion leader) to leaders randomly (Valente
and Davis, 1999, p. 61).
The reason for the importance of social networks is that, to the
extent that planners understand these networks, their influence opera-
tions may target selected, high-payoff nodes and thereby accomplish
objectives much more effectively and efficiently than would be the case
if operations were diffused across a much larger, more heterogeneous,
and less specific set of targets:
In highly• centralized political and military systems, the persua-
sion of individuals at one or a few central nodes often may be
sufficient to influence the compliance of the entire network, while
their elimination may lead to the destabilization or collapse of the
system (Freeman, 1979).
In highly• hierarchical systems, the successful persuasion of indi-
viduals high in the hierarchy often may be sufficient to influence
the compliance of those beneath them, either through direct
efforts to influence followers or through broader social influence
efforts. 22
The combination of early adopters, who bring in innovations or•
ideas from other networks, and opinion leaders, who promote
these innovations, can accelerate their rate of diffusion within a
network. 23
Our judgment is that the field of SNA offers many tools that can
be used to graphically portray networks and facilitate the mapping and
analysis of leadership, terrorist, tribal, or other networks, the under-
22 For discussions of hierarchy in a network, see Krackhardt, Blythe, and McGrath, 1994;
Hummon and Fararo, 1995. For a relatively recent review of the social influence literature,
see Cialdini and Goldstein, 2004.
23 Valente and Davis (1999) present the results of computer simulations of diffusion over a
network consisting of opinion leaders and followers, and they show that the rate of diffusion
of innovations within networks is much greater when opinion leaders are early adopters.
40 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
standing of which is essential in the development of effective and effi-
cient influence strategies. 24
There also are a great many theoretically interesting calculations
for analyzing network data and for identifying key players by virtue
of their degree, closeness, betweenness, information, eigenvector cen-
trality, or some other derived measure computed from network data. 25
But while some of these theory-based calculations may be useful for
identifying prominent members of networks using standard measures
of centrality, most have very little to say about the influence that these
members may exercise over others in the network. 26
There has been some interesting recent theoretical work that offers
hope that network analysts may develop measures of diffusion, conta-
gion, and influence that can inform the development of influence strat-
egies and targeting. 27 This theoretical work has not yet been confirmed
by empirical analyses, however, and until there is empirical support for
the use of these tools in prediction, it seems likely that SNA will make
only a limited contribution to influence operations, largely restricted to
the visualization of network data and informing targeting decisions.
Moreover, influence operations seem to require an understanding
of hybrid, national-level networks that can represent both individual
leaders and large groups of followers, in addition to estimates of the
24 For example, it has been reported that Saddam’s capture was the result of the efforts of an
intelligence cell to provide a network mapping of the “pack of cards” of 55 top Iraqi leaders.
25 For a comprehensive list of available SNA computer programs, see International Network
for Social Network Analysis, 2005. Some other programs in use in the national security,
intelligence, and law enforcement communities—such as Analysts Notebook and the Situ-
ational Influence Assessment Model (SIAM)—also provide network display and analysis
capabilities. For instance, SIAM enables the creation of user-specified “influence net models”
based on expert judgment about factors that will influence decisions and a forward-propaga-
tion algorithm for beliefs about the likelihood of specific factors being true. See, for example,
Rosen and Smith, 2000.
26 Analysts have tended to focus their attention on the problem of disrupting terrorist net-
works, although there is no conceptual reason that some of these approaches would not be
helpful in designing influence operations. On the “key player problem,” see Borgatti, 2003.
27 Diffusion within networks is discussed in Young, 1999; Lopez-Pintado, 2004. See, for
example, the treatment of influence in Avila and Shapiro, 2005; Clark et al., 2005; Hamill
et al., 2007. See also Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos, 2003; Harrison and Carroll, 2002.
Influencing Groups and networks 41
level of influence exercised by leaders over their followers. Importantly,
contemporary SNA representations are limited to relatively small and
relatively tractable networks. The theoretical and data requirements of
analyzing hybrid network models that are relevant to influence opera-
tions are at present somewhat unclear, but until they are addressed, it
would appear that SNA’s contribution to influence operations is likely
to remain limited to descriptive analyses and visualizations.
Influencing Groups and Networks: Conclusions
This chapter has described theoretical and empirical work that is rel-
evant to influencing individuals within groups and to the delibera-
tions and decisions of groups themselves. It has suggested that there
are many factors—ranging from interpersonal influence or power, to
agendas and voting rules, to imperfections in information or the distri-
bution of information within a group—that can affect group delibera-
tions and decisionmaking outcomes and that may offer opportunities
for influence efforts. It also has suggested the importance—and the
important limitations—of contemporary SNA theory in supporting
influence operations. While there is clearly a need for a keener under-
standing of hybrid networks consisting of single leaders and relatively
homogeneous groups of followers and for the processes by which atti-
tudes diffuse or by which power flows within a network, these have
not to date benefited from the scholarly attention they warrant. While
SNA approaches and tools have a role to play in supporting influence
operations, until some of these limitations are overcome, they appear
likely to be relegated to a secondary role.
