Influencing Mass Publics
In some cases, especially those in which planners seek to influence
“hearts and minds” of indigenous populations in a counterinsurgency
campaign or to counter ideological support for terrorism, it may be
desirable to target population subgroups, or even mass populations.
These efforts need to be built on a firm understanding of the factors
that regulate individual-level attitude change in target audiences, which
were described earlier. But they also require an understanding of the
larger social, political, cultural, and information environment and an
understanding of the key fault lines among different segments of the
public.1
To animate what needs to be accomplished in the act of influenc-
ing mass publics, we present a simple model for influencing mass pub-
lics. The model captures many of the key situational and other factors
that must be considered in such an undertaking, including events and
leadership statements, media reporting, and the processes of attitude
change (see Figure 5.1).
The model essentially treats opinion change as “the net outcome
of a chain of behavioral steps. As a minimum it requires (a) adequate
reception (through attention and comprehension) of the persuasive
1 The factors involved in influencing mass public opinion are complex, and the discus-
sion here only skims the surface of the available literature. Readers interested in additional
detail may find some of the following works, most dealing with American public opinion,
useful: Milbrath, 1984; Neuman, 1986; Brody, 1992; Page and Shapiro, 1992; Zaller, 1992b;
Popkin, 1994; Kinder, 1998; Kuklinski et al., 1998; Mcgraw, 1998; Graber, 2003; Aldrich et
al., 2006; Heath, Fisher, and Smith, 2005; and many of the references cited in the section on
individual-level influence.
54 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
Figure 5.1
A Simple Model of Influence for Mass Publics
RAND MG654-5.1
U.S. messages
Others’ messages
Negative
Neutral
Positive
Events
U.S. or others’ events
Negative events
Neutral events
Positive events
Individuals’
“filters” Target
audience
Beliefs,
attitudes,
preferences,
and
behaviors
Probability of
accepting or
rejecting
message
• Inertia or strength
of prior beliefs
• Message content
• Source cues
• Motivation
• Other factors
Mass communications
Individuals’
awareness
Probability of
awareness of
news and/or
message
• Education
• Media consumption
• Political knowledge
• Political
sophistication
• Other factors
Media “filters”
Indirect communications
Through opinion leaders
Tea room, mosque,
workplace, etc.
Indirect communications
Through opinion leaders
Tea room, mosque, workplace, etc.
Unmediated
communications
bypassing mass media
• Handbills
• Posters
• Radio/TV broadcasts
• Town halls
• Email/internet/SMS
• Other direct means
Direct observation
Mass communications
through the media
message; and (b) yielding to what is comprehended” (McGuire, 1968,
p. 1139). The model also highlights both the various hurdles that must
be overcome for an effort to influence to be successful, and the various
reasons that efforts to influence a target audience frequently may fail.
In this regard, the model may serve as both a general guide for good
practice and as a diagnostic tool for identifying where problems can
arise. We will next use this model as a diagnostic tool to describe some
of the challenges associated with the hypothetical case of influencing
members of the Iraqi public.
The figure captures three alternative approaches to influencing, in
this example case, the Iraqi public’s beliefs, attitudes, preferences, and
behaviors, as shown on the far right of the figure.
Influencing Mass publics 55
Beginning with the use of the mass communications path near
the center of the figure, the United States seeks to communicate a vari-
ety of messages to the Iraqi public. These could include messages that
aim to convince this audience that the United States and its coali-
tion partners have honorable intentions, to demonstrate that U.S. goals
do not include permanent occupation of Iraq, to persuade Sunnis and
others to forgo violence in favor of participation in the political process,
and to persuade the public that insurgent propaganda contains fabrica-
tions or messages that have other aims.
These U.S. messages compete with other, potentially more cred-
ible and compelling messages in the Iraqi information environment.
More important, they may compete with events on the ground that
can either lend support to a U.S. message (e.g., building new sewers
that confirm U.S. claims that it is trying to help rebuild Iraq) or may
raise questions about its credibility (e.g., a scandal, such as occurrences
at Abu Ghraib, or civilian noncombatants deaths that are believed to
result from U.S. action). Given the range of sources and factors that
can influence attitudes, true “perception management” of Iraqis would
seem to be a fairly unrealistic goal.
The next hurdle encountered in the mass communications model
is that U.S. messages must penetrate the veil of the media in their
intended, undistorted form. Labeled “media filters” in the figure, this
part of the process can be problematic, either because media organiza-
tions refuse to carry the message in any form or because the message
becomes distorted—through poor translation or purposeful manipu-
lation. For example, in Iraq, many of the newspapers and other media
organizations are associated with ideological or religious currents that
make them more or less likely to report messages that come from, or
are favorable to, the U.S. coalition. Thus, a key challenge will be reach-
ing audiences that choose information channels that are essentially
hostile to U.S. aims and messages.
Assuming that the message passes through the media filter in an
unadulterated form, the next hurdle is getting the target audience to
perceive or receive the message. The probability that individuals will
become aware of a specific message conveyed by the mass media is
affected by a number of factors. These include the availability of that
56 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
message in the larger information environment (i.e., the frequency
with which it is repeated in various mass and other media), whether
the message is presented in an eye-catching way, and whether it is
encountered in a variety of forms. But perception also is a function of
individual-level differences in cognitive ability, education, political
interest, knowledge or sophistication, media consumption habits, and
other, similar factors. Again, an individual may not become aware of a
message unless it is transmitted over information channels that he or
she actually uses and it is repeated with sufficient frequency so that he
or she encounters the message. Moreover, a recurring finding is that
it is the moderately informed who are most likely to be persuaded—
well-informed people typically have already committed to a position
on an issue, while poorly informed people rarely encounter messages
designed to alter their loyalties (Kinder, 1998, p. 183).
Assuming further that an individual has become aware of the
message, the next hurdle is to help the individual understand, evaluate,
and accept the message. As discussed at the beginning of this chapter,
there are a great many factors that affect the probability that an indi-
vidual will accept or reject a message. These factors cover a wide range:
whether he or she is actually motivated to process the message, the
strength or level of crystallization of (or inertia in) his or her attitude,
the extent to which the message comports or conflicts with deeply
held beliefs or values, how message content is presented, whether the
message is sourced to individuals who are credible and likable, and
other situational factors. 2 In Iraq, Salafist Sunnis and Shi’a devotees of
Muqtada al-Sadr may, for example, be far less likely to accept messages
from the U.S. coalition than Kurds or more-secular Shi’a. 3
Assuming that the individual has accepted the message, the next
hurdle is to persuade the individual to change his or her attitudes to be
consistent with the message or to act in a way that is consistent with
2 To provide a sense of the number of factors that can affect reception and acceptance,
PhaseOne Communications, for example, has developed a diagnostic protocol for analyzing
messages that uses more than 170 variables.
3 To the extent that al-Sadr’s followers also are less well educated than other Shi’a, they may
be less likely to receive and understand these messages.
Influencing Mass publics 57
the message. Again, motivation; comportment; or conflict with prior
attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors; and a variety of other factors affect the
likelihood that individuals will make the desired change. For example,
short of some sort of accommodation on a variety of issues—the nature
of Iraqi federalism, division of oil earnings, and so on—many Iraqi
Sunnis are unlikely to choose to resolve their grievances via a peaceful
political process. This example highlights the importance of concrete
policy actions that are consistent with a message and can improve its
credibility and acceptance.
Successful use of the mass communications path is further com-
plicated by the ready availability of various alternative competing
information channels, individual-level differences in beliefs about the
reliability and credibility of different information channels, and ulti-
mately, uncertainties about which of the available information chan-
nels audience members choose to rely upon for information. 4
Also shown in Figure 5.1, the mass communications path is not
the only path that is available for influencing a target audience; it also
is possible to use unmediated or indirect communications:
The top part of the chart describes• unmediated communications that
are not filtered by mass media organizations. This path eschews
efforts to place messages in mainstream media and emphasizes
various alternative means of getting messages to a target audi-
ence. In the case of Iraq, these have included leaflets, handbills,
posters, tactical PSYOP patrols, and various other means. Even
though this path avoids the editorial and other decisions that may
prevent a message from being carried by the mainstream media,
it presents the same challenges regarding the competitive infor-
mation environment, message awareness, acceptance or rejection,
and attitude or behavior change that was presented in the mass
communications path.
The bottom part of the chart describes• indirect communications, in
which the focus of communications is elites and opinion leaders.
4 The role of source credibility in persuasion is discussed in Hovland and Weiss, 1951;
Sternthal, Phillips, and Dholakia, 1978; Mondak, 1990; among other works.
58 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
This path depends on the willingness of elites and opinion lead-
ers to be persuaded and who, having been persuaded to accept a
message, are willing to communicate that message to their fol-
lowers. In the case of Iraq, convincing tribal, religious, or other
local opinion leaders to accept a message may be an effective and
efficient way to reach an entire community.
Opinion Leadership and Media Communications
The role of opinion leaders—whether political, social, religious, tribal,
or otherwise—is a central consideration in the development of mass
attitudes and also for planning influence operations. Members of
groups naturally tend to follow their group leaders and reject the lead-
ership of groups that they view less sympathetically.
A great amount of scholarship on American public opinion sug-
gests that individuals use partisan, ideological, or other heuristic cues to
help them make sense of larger policy debates. These individuals typi-
cally are more inclined to accept the stated positions of their natural
leaders (for example, leaders of the individual’s own political party—
who are likely to be judged as being more credible, likable, etc.—than
the leaders of an opposing party) than their natural opponents.5 The
implication for influence operations planners is that the statements of
favored local opinion leaders generally will be far more credible than
those of U.S. or coalition leaders and that the trust and credibility of
individual local leaders also is likely to vary by religious, sectarian,
tribal, or other group norms. It is, therefore, important to have a capa-
bility to track the tone and content of these statements to be able to
ascertain the effects of leaders’ messages on their followers.
In a similar vein, analysts supporting influence operations fre-
quently will be interested in ascertaining which events and U.S. and
other official statements and behavior are being reported Analysts also
want to know whether and how their operations are affecting the tone
5 Examples of convergent scholarship in this area include Neuman, 1986; Brody, 1992;
Zaller, 1992b; Popkin, 1994.
Influencing Mass publics 59
and content of media reporting. Although there are many techniques
for identifying themes in texts, the technique of content analysis is a
fairly mature one that can be of some assistance for this purpose. 6 By
comparison, the technique of semantic network analysis does not yet
appear to have demonstrated its operational utility, but, with further
advances, it also might prove useful for influence operations assess-
ment. Each will be discussed below.
Moreover, although this is not explicitly represented in the simple
model, it also bears mentioning that a number of American public
opinion researchers have noted the influence on political attitudes of
trusted opinion leaders who are personally known to an individual—
coworkers, friends, and family members, for example. The importance
of this channel relative to the other channels is not particularly well
understood.
Content Analysis
Content analysis of communications is an analytic technique that can
assist in the assessment of leadership statements and media reporting
by providing quantitative measures of changing tone and content.
Content analysis was used by the Federal Broadcast Intelligence
Service (FBIS) of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
during World War II to monitor and report on the broadcasts of oppo-
nents, allies, and neutrals in order to summarize what was said and to
infer intentions, strategy, and calculations behind propaganda com-
munications (Riddel, 1992). The difficulty of acquiring information
about adversary policies and strategy and mass attitudes through other
channels, especially in the Far East, made content analysis of mass
communications media a key source of information on foreign govern-
ments’ wartime policies.7 The opaque nature of the Soviet leadership
ensured that content analysis would continue to be used as an ana-
6 For a review of about a dozen techniques for identifying themes in texts, see Ryan and
Bernard, 2003.
7 George (1973, p. ix) reports that 81 percent of the FCC inferences about Nazi intentions,
strategy, and calculations, which were made with the help of content analysis, proved to be
accurate when later compared with captured records.
60 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
lytic tool for assisting in making inferences about power relationships
and policy changes. More recently, application of the technique has
spread beyond the province of political science, psychology, sociology,
and communications research to applied analysis in commercial and
government settings.
Among the many applications of content analysis that may be of
interest to analysts supporting influence operations are the following:
Assessing the changing content of Osama bin Laden’s speeches•
and statements to assist in detecting strategy or policy changes,
warnings of major attacks, or psychological changes 8
Tracking changes over time in the tone—positive or negative—of•
foreign official or media references to the United States, its lead-
ers, institutions, or policies 9
Tracking the media penetration of key U.S. themes or topics—•
including those that have been proffered as part of a STRAT-
COMM “drumbeat”—to ascertain the degree to which messages
are “getting through” to the media 10
Tracking cooperative and conflict behavior in interstate relations•
in peacetime, crisis, and war, including signals of escalatory or
deescalatory intentions11
Gauging the possible level of resistance to a prospective invasion•
(Lasswell, 1938)
8 Knowledge by a subject that his words and actions are being monitored closely can, how-
ever, affect the content of his or her statements. Such knowledge is a form of “theory opaque-
ness,” which provides opportunities for manipulation.
9 For a pioneering application, see Lasswell, 1947, which reports Lasswell’s content analyses
of a number of foreign newspapers between 1939 and 1941.
10 A recent analysis of media reporting on civilian casualties and collateral damage in the
U.S. and foreign press can be found in Larson and Savych, 2006.
11 See, for example, Holsti, 1972; McClelland, 1961, 1964, 1977; Wilkenfeld et al., 1980;
Brecher, Wilkenfeld, and Moser, 1988; Wilkenfeld, Brecher, and Moser, 1988; Brecher
and Wilkenfeld, 1997; Gerner and Schrodt, 1998. Much of the work done by Wilkenfeld,
Brecher, and associates was sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency’s
Cybernetic Technology Office. On the limits of the event data that have been compiled by
international relations scholars, see McClelland, 1983.
Influencing Mass publics 61
Assessing latent or emerging policy divisions between political•
interest groups in a foreign nation.12
Content analysis is a set of procedures for transforming unstruc-
tured (and usually textual) information into a format that allows
analysis—especially, quantitative analysis.13 According to the U.S.
Government Accountability Office (GAO), 1989, p. 6:
Content analysis is a set of procedures for collecting and organiz-
ing information in a standardized format that allows analysts to
make inferences about the characteristics and meaning of written
and other recorded material. Simple formats can be developed
for summarizing information or counting the frequency of state-
ments. More complex formats can be created for analyzing trends
or detecting subtle differences in the intensity of statements.
The typical steps involved in conducting content analysis are (1)
identifying the specific objectives of the analysis, (2) determining what
material should be included in the content analysis, (3) selecting the
units of analysis (e.g., newspaper story or document), (4) developing
coding categories, (5) testing the validity and reliability of the coding
scheme, including coding a sample of the material to test inter-coder
reliability, (6) coding the material, and (7) analyzing and interpreting
the results.14
In fact, there are a number of ways to go about conducting con-
tent analysis:
Human-Coded Generation of Data.• The traditional approach to
generating content analysis data is to have the coding done by
human coders (usually graduate students) who have been thor-
12 See, for example, FBIS, 2004. Content analysis could reveal differences in tone in report-
ing on the Iranian nuclear issue in Iranian conservative, mainstream, and progressive media,
for example.
13 Among the more comprehensive discussions of content analysis are Berelson, 1962;
North, 1963; Stone et al., 1966; Holsti, 1969; Weber, 1985; Krippendorff, 2004.
14 This list was adapted from GAO, 1989, p. 8.
62 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
oughly trained in the coding rules that are to be used and whose
inter-coder reliability (i.e., the amount of agreement or correspon-
dence among two or more content analysis coders about how a
text or some other material should be coded) has been established.
This is, however, a very expensive and time-consuming approach
to coding texts.
Using Automated Systems to Generate Data.• There also are a number
of academic and commercial software programs that can assist
in performing content analysis of textual data.15 Automated sys-
tems excel at detecting the presence of words and phrases in texts
and generally are deemed to be far more efficient than humans in
these tasks.16 By comparison, humans generally do a much better
job of ascertaining the actual meaning of texts, detecting irony
and humor, and other higher-level tasks.
Analyzing Data from Online Information Retrieval Services.• Many
online information retrieval services provide full-text or keyword
search capabilities and the ability to limit searches by date or
source document.17 Analysts can thus perform searches and count
the number of news stories or other reports that contain specified
words or themes in one or more sources (including many foreign
sources) for a fixed period of time (e.g., by day or month), so that
trend lines can be constructed that are suggestive of the changing
level of reporting on the words or themes of interest.18
15 Among the software packages GAO examined in its 1989 report were askSam, Text-
base Alpha, AQUAD, TEXTPACK PC, Micro-OCP, WordCruncher, and WordPerfect (see
GAO, 1989, “Software for Content Analysis,” Appendix II). . For example, a Google search
for “content analysis software” in January 2005 yielded a much longer list. Software pro-
grams like the Kansas Event Data System (KEDS) also might be adapted to other purposes.
16 In 1990, Schrodt and Donald reported that a set of 500 rules used in automatically coding
events data from press reporting in NEXIS had a 70–80 percent accuracy rate. Schrodt also
reports that his TABARI software is 70 times faster at coding events than his KEDS soft-
ware, and that “TABARI running on a G3 [computer] does in one second what a human
coder does in about three months. This is a wall-clock speedup of around a factor of 7.8-mil-
lion” (Schrodt, 2001).
17 For example, Lexis-Nexis, Proquest, and DIALOG.
18 See, for example, Larson and Savych, 2005.
Influencing Mass publics 63
Performing• Secondary Analyses of Content Analysis of Data. Al-
though the results may not be timely enough to be relevant for
policy or military analyses, some academic organizations post
their data sets19 or provide an interface that enables users to search
for news reports that may be of interest. 20
Using Content Analysis Findings from Other Organizations.• There
are a small number of research organizations that routinely con-
duct content analyses of U.S. media or produce reports that some-
times have results that are useful to analysts. 21
Once content analysis of data has been generated, a number of
analyses in support of influence operations can be undertaken, includ-
ing trend analyses of media reporting or leadership statements over
time; analyses of the co-occurrence of words or themes in texts; analy-
ses of the correlations between changes in the occurrence of a word or
theme and changes in target audience beliefs, attitudes, or behaviors;
and cluster or factor analyses that can assist in grouping text sources.
We judge automated content analytic tools to be ready for operational
use in a variety of these sorts of applications.
Semantic Network Analysis
Semantic network analysis grows out of content analysis and is a tech-
nique primarily used by communications researchers. Semantic net-
work analysis is similar to social network analysis insofar as it uses
nodes and links (or relational ties), the defining feature of which is that
19 For example, Schrodt, director of KEDS at the University of Kansas, posts the results of
his research program’s automated coding of newswire reports on various international issues,
using a coding scheme that is derived from Charles McClelland’s World Event Interaction
Survey conflict-cooperation coding scheme (Schrodt, Davis, and Weddle, 1994; KEDS Web
site, 2006).
20 The Vanderbilt Television News Archive (n.d.) lets users identify television news reports
by keyword or phrase in the abstract for each report.
21 Organizations that routinely report the results of content analyses of U.S. television
reporting include the Center for Media and Public Affairs in Washington, D.C., and the
Tyndall Report. FBIS also occasionally produces content analyses of media reporting.
64 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
a connection of some form is established between the nodes. 22 In the
case of semantic networks, however, the links typically are between
words or people using words: a word-by-word (or theme-by-theme)
matrix of words or themes in a body of text can be treated as nodes,
and the connection weights become the links; alternatively, a person-
by-person matrix can indicate how many words or themes any two
people used in common (see Schnegg and Bernard, 1996; Rosen et al.,
2003; Hanneman, 2001). Once the data are reduced to matrices, such
as a complete paired comparison similarities matrix, they can then be
subjected to sophisticated statistical analyses and portrayal as multidi-
mensional graphs (see Rosen et al., 2003).
A common approach in semantic network analysis is for the com-
puter program to read through text with a user-defined window of n
words. A “neuron” is created for each new word encountered, and the
connections between words are strengthened or weakened depending
on whether the words co-occur in the same window. 23
22 There are a number of semantic network software tools available, including CATPAC
(Categorization Package) by the Galileo Company, TextAnalyst by Megaputer, and Seman-
tica SE by Semantic Research, Inc.
23 For example, a product called TextAnalyst describes the process as follows:
The text is considered as a sequence of symbols organized into words and sentences. This
sequence is moved through a window of variable length (from two to twenty symbols
can be seen simultaneously), shifting it by one symbol at a time. The snapshots of the
text fragments visible through the window are recorded in dynamically added neurons.
The created hierarchical neural network contains several layers: those fragments that
occur in text more than once are stored in neurons that belong to the higher levels of the
network. This neural network realizes frequency-based multi-level dictionaries of differ-
ent text elements (letters, syllables, stems, morphemes, words, and phrases). Words are
selected as basic operational elements, while other elements are used as auxiliary infor-
mation during the analysis (Megaputer Intelligence, Inc., 2007).
And the Galileo Company’s CATPAC is described as follows:
CATPAC is a self-organizing artificial neural network that has been optimized for read-
ing text. CATPAC is able to identify the most important words in a text and determine
patterns of similarity based on the way they’re used in text. It does this by assigning a
neuron to each major word in the text. It then runs a scanning window through the text.
The neuron representing a word becomes active when that word appears in the window,
and remains active as long as the word remains in the window. Up to n words can be in
the window at once, where n is a parameter set by the user. As in the human brain, the
Influencing Mass publics 65
Because the most common words in text (e.g., and, the) typically
are not very helpful in understanding the main themes of the text, this
technique can require significant effort to identify the many words that
should be excluded from the analysis and to winnow down the themes
that are the focus of analysis. The sorts of results generated by the tech-
nique at present, moreover, generally seem to be of greater academic
than policy interest or operational utility. 24 Nevertheless, semantic net-
work analysis would appear to be a worthy contender for further test-
ing and development, and it could at some future time be suitable for
operational application.
Assessing Mass Public Opinion
As described in the model in Figure 5.1, effective influence operations
require an understanding of a wide range of individual- and group-level
characteristics that regulate the diffusion of mass attitudes associated
with support or opposition for U.S. objectives and policies. Without
such an understanding, efforts to gain the support of a critical mass of
the populace—e.g., win the support of the median voter—may prove
impossible.
In particular, the model suggests that it is important for plan-
ners to understand the likelihood of an individual becoming aware of
a message. Such an understanding requires data on how the individual
relates to his information environment. Important attitudinal variables
that are associated with message awareness include the credibility and
trustworthiness of different media channels (e.g., TV stations, newspa-
pers, magazines), which media individuals actually consume and the
extent of their media consumption (e.g., the average daily number of
connections between neurons that are simultaneously active are strengthened following
the law of classical conditioning. The pattern of weights or connections among neurons
forms a representation within CATPAC of the associations among the words in the text.
This pattern of weights represents complete information about the similarities among all
the words in the text (Woelfel, 1998).
24 Examples of semantic network analysis can be found in Kim and Barnett, 1994; Kim,
2005; Peace Research Institute in the Middle East, n.d.; Rosen et al., 2003.
66 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
newspapers read or TV news programs watched), and their political
interest, knowledge, and sophistication.
The model also suggests the importance of individual-level cul-
tural values or other norms and attitudes that may serve as filters
regulating the likelihood that a given message, once received, will be
accepted or rejected. To understand such norms requires some level of
knowledge about the underlying structure of mass public attitudes and
the factors that constrain these attitudes. Such an understanding can
facilitate identification of distinct subgroups that may require different
communication approaches to ensure that messages reach them or dif-
ferent content to reduce the likelihood of message rejection.
Factors that can constrain attitudes include demographic charac-
teristics, such as gender, race, ethnicity, or tribe; religion; sect; culture;
philosophical or ideological viewpoint; political affiliation; subscrip-
tion to a specific cultural narrative; or sympathy with some other intel-
lectual current or system (e.g., Islamism) that helps individuals order
and make sense of their worlds. To the extent that a specific system
of thought dominates the thinking of a subgroup, planners can tailor
their messages to resonate with core precepts of that system.
There are a number of other attitudes that also can be of sig-
nificant interest to planners. These include attitudes toward various
national leaders, including their credibility, likeability, or trustworthi-
ness; views on the relative importance of problems that respondents
believe their country is facing; beliefs about the benign or malign nature
of U.S. policies or the aims and conduct of U.S. coalition forces; and
attitudes and preferences regarding all manner of political and policy
issues that relate to support for U.S. or adversary aims. Moreover, all
of these characteristics of mass publics need to be understood with a
sufficient level of detail and fidelity to detect subgroup distinctions, to
baseline and track relevant attitudes, to tailor campaign messages and
policies to different groups, and to assess the results of influence efforts.
Of course, in the context of a military campaign, there are many chal-
lenges to ensuring that the sorts of attitudes that are presented in focus
groups and surveys are sincere ones.
There are numerous techniques that can be employed for collect-
ing the necessary data to baseline, track, and assess attitudes and the
Influencing Mass publics 67
results of influence operations. These can include face-to-face meetings
that take place during patrols; focus groups with locals to clarify their
views and formulate an understanding of the underlying structure of
their attitudes, policy preferences, and behaviors; and survey research
that can facilitate the creation of quantitative baselines and trend anal-
yses of key attitudes or that can predict attitude change based on a
knowledge of underlying attitude structures and, thereby, inform the
development of appropriately targeted and tailored influence campaigns
and messages. 25 Despite some difficulties in conducting focus groups
and attitude surveys in such dangerous environments as Afghanistan
and Iraq, there appear to be few alternatives for developing the sort of
detailed understanding of attitudes that is necessary for effective influ-
ence operations.
Lessons from Case Studies
To supplement our review of the literature on influencing mass pub-
lics, we conducted a series of case study analyses of how commercial
advertising and marketing, American-style political campaigns, and
public diplomacy efforts seek to differentiate and persuade mass pub-
lics. The detailed results of our case studies are provided in Appendixes
A through C, but the main lessons of influence efforts in these domains
can be summarized as follows:
They are aimed at achieving• specific desired objectives and effects,
typically a change in a key attitude, belief, preferred policy, or
behavior.
They are directed toward• key target audiences, whether an indi-
vidual, a decisionmaking group, a military unit, a population sub-
group, or the mass public of a nation.
They make use of the most effective combination of• information
channels—i.e., those channels that are both most likely to reach
25 For recent work using a combination of trend analysis and respondent-level modeling
of attitude data to predict policy-relevant attitudes with a fairly high degree of fidelity, see
Larson et al., 2004; Larson and Savych, 2005, 2006.
68 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
the target audience and most likely to be viewed as unbiased and
credible.
They are mindful of• audience characteristics, including preexisting
attitudes and beliefs that may condition an audience’s willingness
to be influenced.
They are• timed to influence actors before they decide or act, in the
case of leaders and decisionmaking groups, or before attitudes crys-
tallize, in the case of mass audiences.
They make use of messengers with compelling• source character-
istics—i.e., those whose professional or technical competence,
likeability, credibility, trust or confidence, or high Q score make
them effective spokespersons. 26
They rely upon messages with• compelling message characteristics—
i.e., those whose content, format, cognitive and emotional appeal,
and other characteristics will most resonate with the audience.
They• facilitate adaptation by providing timely feedback on effects,
so that information channels, messengers, themes and messages,
and the like can be modified to increase their persuasiveness.
Before proceeding, it is important to note that there are ample
reasons for caution regarding whether these lessons from peacetime
examples translate particularly well into the chaotic environment of
wartime, stability, and reconstruction operations such as those wit-
nessed in Iraq and Afghanistan.
First, the U.S. government and military are not selling goods
and services in a competitive environment (Wolf and Rosen, 2004).
In Iraq in late 2005, for example, the United States was (1) attempting
to generate a high level of turnout for the December 15, 2005, Iraqi
national elections, while simultaneously trying to encourage patience
with the U.S. role as an occupying power until the Iraqis could manage
the insurgency themselves and (2) trying to foster a stable (and dem-
26 The Q score measures the appeal of a person in terms of the number of those who rec-
ognize the person and the number of those who mention the person as one of their favorite
people.
Influencing Mass publics 69
ocratic) political equilibrium that would enable U.S. forces to begin
withdrawing.
Second, the involvement of the military—and the ever-present
possibility of being the object of coercion or simply getting caught in
the crossfire—make these situations qualitatively different from peace-
time influence efforts. 27 Put simply, the introduction of violence can
bring a coercive and even life-threatening quality to influence efforts
that is absent in peacetime influence efforts. And because the threat or
use of force can endanger safety and physical survival, appeals backed
by force are likely to be far more compelling than appeals based on
logic, emotion, or social norms. 28 With a few notable exceptions, how-
ever, scholars generally have not focused on the role of coercion in the
act of persuasion. 29
Influencing Mass Publics: Conclusions
This chapter has focused on approaches that can help to overcome
some of the difficulties associated with understanding mass publics. We
began with a discussion of a simple model of influence for mass pub-
lics that highlights the various hurdles that influence operations need
27 See the summary of appeals to fear and attitude change in Chapter Two.
28 Psychologist Abraham Maslow (Wikipedia, n.d.[a]) suggested a hierarchy of values—
from foundational values, such as physical survival and safety; to love; esteem; and self-
actualization—in which the basic concept is that the higher needs in the hierarchy come
into focus only when all the needs that are lower down in the pyramid are mainly or entirely
satisfied. In the context of PSYOP, Whiteman (2004) has suggested that “[m]ore basic needs
toward the bottom of Maslow’s pyramid would be rated as having greater influence relative
to needs toward the top of the pyramid.” We are grateful to Whiteman for sharing a copy of
his paper with us. See also Millen, 2006–07.
29 Beyond the role of fear in persuasion discussed in Chapter Two, there also is a fair amount
of relevant work on the psychological effects of the threat or use of force in the international
relations field. See Millen, 2006–07; George, Hall, and Simons, 1971; George and Smoke,
1973; George, 1991, 2002; Craig and George, 1995. Other works in this genre include Schell-
ing’s classic, 1960 (rev. 1980); Byman, Waxman, and Larson, 1999; Byman and Waxman,
2002; Defense Science Board, 2003. Among other works, the question of influence during
wartime is covered in some detail in Brodie, 1973; Kecskemeti, 1978; Cimbala and Dunn,
1987; Sigal, 1989; Pape, 1996.
70 Foundations of Effective Influence Operations
to successfully overcome to influence attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors.
We then returned to the subject of leadership, which was discussed
earlier, regarding influence within groups and networks, and argued
that tracking opinion leadership (and media reporting) and employ-
ing opinion leaders in the influence enterprise are highly desirable ele-
ments of a larger influence strategy. Specifically, we argued that quan-
titative content analyses of leadership and media content were essential
to understanding the changing tone and content of these communica-
tion streams. Finally, we discussed the role of public opinion polling
and attitude surveys as a way to track and diagnose reasons for success
or failure in influencing attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors. In particular,
we see attitude surveys as an efficient way to assess whether influence
messages are reaching target audiences, whether messages are being
accepted, and whether they are resulting in the desired changes in atti-
tudes, beliefs, and behaviors.