Becoming a World-Saver: A Theory of Conversion to a Deviant Perspective
John Lofland; Rodney Stark
American Sociological Review, Vol. 30, No. 6. (Dec., 1965), pp. 862-875.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28196512%2930%3A6%3C862%3ABAWATO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Z
American Sociological Review is currently published by American Sociological Association.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/asa.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Wed Jan 30 14:01:47 2008
BECOMING A WORLD-SAVER: A THEORY OF
CONVERSION TO A DEVIANT PERSPECTIVE *
JOHN LOFLAND RODNEYSTARK
University of Michigan University of California, Berkeley
Materials derived from observation of a West Coast millenarian cult are employed to de-
velop a "value-addedJ' model of the conditions under which conversion occztrs. For conver-
sion a person must experience, within a religious problem-solving perspective, enduring,
acutely-felt tensions that lead him to define himself as a religious seeker; he must encounter
the cult at a turning point i n his life; within the cult a n affective bond must be formed ( o r
$re-exist) and any extra-cult attachments, neutralized; and there he must be exposed to
intensive interaction if he is to become a "deployable agent!'
ALL men and all human groups have of the Southwest Indians to Christianity.
ultimate values, a world view, or a The continual emergence of tiny cults and
perspective furnishing them a more sects in western industrial nations makes it
or less orderly and comprehensible picture clear, however, that sometimes persons re-
of the world. Clyde Kluckhohn remarked linquish a more widely held perspective for
that no matter how primitive and crude it an unknown, obscure and often, socially de-
may be, there is a "philosophy behind the valued one.
way of life of every individual and of every In this paper we shall outline a model of
relatively homogeneous group a t any given the conversion process througl~ which a
point in their histories." l When a person group of people came to see the world in
gives up one such perspective or ordered terms set by the doctrines of one such ob-
view of the world for another we refer to scure and devalued perspective-a small
this Drocess as con~ersion.~ millenarian religious cult. Although it is
Frequently such conversions are between based on only a single group, we think the
popular and widely held perspectives-from model suggests some rudiments of a general
Catholicism to Communism, or from the account of conversion to deviant perspec-
world view of an underdeveloped or primi- tives. But the degree to which this scheme
tive culture to that of a technically more applies to shifts between widely held per-
advanced society, as from the Peyote Cult spectives must, for now, remain problematic.
* Publication A-15 of the Center for Research on
Social Organization, University of Michigan (also BACKGROUND
available as Publication A-53, Survey Research
Center, University of California, Berkeley). This Our discussion is based on observation of
investigation was supported in part by a Public a small, millenarian cult headquartered in
Health Service fellowship to the senior author from Bay City; a major urban center on the
the National Institute of Mental Health (MPM-16,
661; 5 F1 MH-16, 661-02). West Coast. This "movement" constitutes
1 Clyde Kluckhohn, "Values and Value-Orienta- the American following of a self-proclaimed
tions in the Theory of Action: An Exploration in "Lord of the Second Advent," a RIr. Chang,
Definition and Classification," in Talcott Parsons who has attracted more than 5,000 converts
and Edward Shils (eds.), Toward A General The-
ory of Action, New York: Harper Torchbooks, in Korea since 1954. The "Divine Precepts,"
1962, p. 409. the doctrine Chang claims was revealed to
2The meaning of this term has been muddied by him by God, concerns a complete "Restora-
the inconsistent usage of Christian religious writers. tion of the World" to the conditions of the
Often they have used "conversion" to refer to an Garden of Eden by 1967. The message wasaroused concern among persons who already ac-
cept the essential truth of the ideological system. brought to this country by Miss Yoon-Sook
Yet, in keeping with the earliest Christian exam- Lee, a graduate of Methodist seminaries,
ples of conversion, such as that of St. Paul, they and a former professor of social welfare
have also used the word to describe changes from
one such system to another. These are very differ-
ent events and ought to be indicated by different All names that might e o n ~ l ~ r o ~ u i s e~ o n v c l t s '
words. anonymity have been changed.
862
863CONVERSION T O A DEVIANT PERSPECTIVE
a t a large, church-supported, women's col-
lege in Seoul.
I n 1959 Miss Lee arrived in a university
town (here called Northwest Town) in the
Pacific Northwest, and, in two years gained
five totally committed converts to the Di-
vine Precepts (hereafter referred to as the
D.P.) . I n December, 1960, after difficulties
with local clergymen and public opinion,
largely touched off when two female con-
verts deserted their husbands and children,
the group moved to Bay City.
By mid-1963, 15 more converts had been
gained and by the end of 1964 the cult num-
bered more than 150 adherents. Converts
were expected to devote their lives to spread-
ing "God's New Revelation" and preparing
for the New Age theocracy which God and
a host of active spirits were expected to
create on earth shortly. Typically the con-
verts lived communally in a series of houses
and flats, contributed their salaries from
menial jobs to the common treasury, thus
supporting Miss Lee as a full-time leader,
and gave all their spare time to witnessing
and otherwise proselytizing.
I n this brief report, analysis will be lim-
cruitment, and also increasingly specifies
who is available. At least theoretically, since
the mission of the cult was to "convert
America," all Americans are potential re-
cruits. Each condition narrows the range of
clientele: ultimately, only a handful of
persons responded to the D.P. call.
Typically, and perhaps ideally, the con-
ditions develop as presented here, but the
temporal order may vary. The ordering prin-
ciple is activation, rather than temporal
occurrence alone: the time of activation is
the same whether a condition exists for a
considerable time prior to its becoming rele-
vant to D.P. conversion or only develops in
time to accomplish conversion.
Data were gathered through participant
observation in the cult from early 1962 to
mid-1963. Further information was obtained
from interviews with converts, their ac-
quaintances, families, and work-mates; with
persons who took some interest in the D.P.
but were not converts; and with a variety of
clergymen, oficials, neighbors, employers
and others in contact with the adherents.
Less intensive observation was conducted
through mid-1964.
ited to the single problem of con~ersion.~ Although complete data pertinent to all
Under what conditions and through what
mechanisms did persons come to share the
D.P. view of the world, and, conversely, who
rejected this perspective?
The logical and methodological structure
of the analysis is based on a "value-added"
conception. That is, we shall offer a series of
seven (more or less) successively accumu-
lating factors, which in their total combina-
tion seem to account for conversion to the
D.P. All seven factors seem necessary for
conversion, and together they appear to be
sufficient conditions.
The sequential arrangement of the seven
conditions may be conceived in the imagery
of a funnel; that is, as a structure that
systematically reduces the number of per-
sons who call be considered available for rc-
Other aspects of the cult's formation, develop-
ment, maintenance and proselytization procedures
are analyzed in John Lofland, The World-Savers,
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, forthcoming.
Neil J. Smelser, Theory of Collective Behavior,
New York: The Free Press of Glencoe, 1963, pp.
12-21. See also Ralph Turner, "The Quest for Uni-
versals in Sociological Research," Amen'can Socio-
logical Review, 18 (1953), pp. 604-611.
seven steps of the conversion model were not
obtainable for all 21 persons who were clas-
sified as converts by mid-1963, full informa-
tion on all seven factors was available for
15 converts. All the available data conform
to the model. In presenting biographical in-
formation to explicate and document the
model, we shall focus on the most central of
the early converts, drawing on material from
less central and later converts for illustra-
tions. The converts were primarily white,
Protestant, and young (typically below 35) ;
some had college training, and most were
Americans of lower middle-class and small-
town origins.
CONVERSION OPERATIONALLY DEFIKEI)
How does one deterliline when a person
has "really" talcen up a different perspec-
tive? The most obvious evidence, of course,
is his own declaration that he has done so.
This frequently takes the form of a tale
of regeneration, about how terrible life was
before and how ~vonderfulit is now.6 But
GPeter Bcrgcr has given us a dclightful charac-
- -
864 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW
verbal claims are easily made and sinlple to
falsify. Indeed, several persons who pro-
fessed belief in the D.P. were regarded as
insincere by all core members. A display
of loyalty and commitment, such as giving
time, energy, and money to the D.P. enter-
prise, invariably brought ratification of the
conversion from all core members, but to
require such a display a s evidence of "ac-
tual" conversion overlooks four persons who
made only verbal professions but were uni-
versally regarded as converts by core mem-
bers. T o avoid this difficulty two classes or
degrees of conversion may be distinguished:
z i e ~ b a lconverts, or fellow-travelers and fol-
lowers who professed belief and were ac-
cepted by core members as sincere, but tool<
no active role in the D.P. enterprise; and
total converts, who exhibited their commit-
ment through deeds as well as words.
U p to a point, the same factors that ac-
count for total conversion also account for
verbal conversion and initially we shall dis-
cuss the two groups together. Later we shall
attempt to show that verbal conversion is
transformed into total conversion only when
the last stage in the conversion sequence
develops.
A MODEL O F CONVERSION
T o account for the process by which per-
sons came to be world-savers for the D.P.,
we shall investigate two genres of conditions
or factors. T h e first, which might be called
predisposing conditions, comprises attributes
of persons prior to their contact with the
cult. These are background factors, the con-
junction of which forms a pool of potential
D.P. converts. Unfortunately, i t has becorne
conventional in sociology to treat demo-
graphic characteristics, structural or per-
sonal frustrations, and the like, as com-
pletely responsible for "pushing" persons
into collectivities dedicated to protest againsj
the prevailing social order. These factors
are not unimportant, but a model composed
entirely of them is woefully incomplete.
T h e character of their incon~pletenessis es-
pressed by a Meadiaa paraphrase of T. S.
Eliot: "Between the impulse and the act
terization of the reconstructive functions of such
tales. See his Invitatiolz t o Suciology, New York:
Doubleday Anchor, 1953, Ch. 3.
falls the shadow." T h e second genre of con-
ditions is this shado~ved area, the situa-
tional contingencies.
Situational contingencies are conditions
that lead to the successful recruitment of
persons predisposed to the D.P. enterprise.
These conditions arise froin conirontation
and interaction between the potential con-
vert and D.P. members. Many persons who
qualified for conversion on the basis of pre-
disposing factors entered interpersonal rela-
tions with D.P. members, but because the
proper situational conditions were not met,
they did not become converts.
With these two classes of factors in mind,
we may turn to a discussion of the first and
most general of predisposing conditions.
1. T e n s i o n . N o model of human conduct
ectirely lacks a conception of tension, strain,
frustration, deprivation, or other version of
the hedonic calculus. And, not surprisingly,
even the most cursory examination of the
life situations of converts before they em-
braced the D.P. reveals what they a t least
perceived as considerable t e n ~ i o n . ~
This tension is best characterized as a
felt discrepancy between some imaginary,
ideal state of affairs and the circumstances
in which these people saw themselves caught
u p . We suggest that acutely felt tension is
3 !~ccessary,but far froin sufficient condition
for rc~nversion.That is, it creates some dis-
position to act. But tension nlay be resol:,ed
in a number of ways (or remain uilre-
solved); hence, that these people are in a
tension situation does not izidicate te~hat
action they may tak?.
Just as tension_ can have myrlacl conse-
quence.s, its srJurces can also be e-:ceer!ingl~i
disparate. Ssme concrete varieties we dl.,-
co\-erecl mere: longing for unrealized wealth,
lzno~v,yledge,fame, acd prestige; hallucina-
tory activity fc)r which the person lacken'
a n y successf~d definition; frustrrted sexual
and marital relations; homosexual guilt:
acute fear ef face-to-face interaction; d i e
abling and disfiguring physical conditions;
and-perhaps of a slightly different order-
a frustrated desire for a significant, even
7 We conceive this tension as su?~jecli\reto avoid
jurlrments about b o ~ vte:?sioll-prnduci.ng the "ob-
jective" circumsta.nces actually were, attending in-
stead to the way these circumslances were experi-
enced.
865CONVERSTON TO A DE,VTRNT PERSPECTIVE
heroic, religious status, t o "know t h e mind
of God intimately," a n d to b e a famous
agent for his divine purpose^.^
Brief life histories of a few central be-
lievers will indicate concretely w h a t bothered
them as pre-converts. T h e case of Miss Lee,
t h e "Messiah's" emissary i n America, illus-
trates t h e aspiration t o b e a n important
religious figure.
Miss Lee was born and raised in Korea and
converted to Chang's cult in 1954 when she
was 39. During her early teens she was sub-
ject to fits of depression and used to sit on a
secluded hilltop and seek spirit contacts.
Shortly she began receiving visions and hear-
ing voices-a hallucinatory pattern she was
to maintain thereafter. Her adolescent mysti-
cal experience convinced her she had a special
mission to perform for God and at the age
of 19 she entered a Methodist seminary in
Japan. She was immediately disenchanted by
the "worldly concern" of the seminarians and
the training she received, although she stuck
out the five-year course. Prior to entering the
seminary she had become engrossed in the
Spirtualistic writings of Emmanuel Sweden-
borg, who soon began to appear to her in
visions. Her estrangement from conventional
religious roles was so great that upon graduat-
ing from seminary she, alone among her class-
mates, refused ordination. She returned to
Korea a t the start of World War 11, and by
1945 was professor of social welfare at a de-
nominational university in Seoul. I n 1949 the
Methodist Board of Missions sent her to a
Canadian university for further theological
training. There she wrote her thesis on Swe-
denborg, who continued to visit her in spirit
form. I n Canada, as in Japan, she was bit-
terly disappointed by the "neglect of things
of the spirit," caused concern among the
faculty by constantly hiding to pray and seek
visions, and occasionally stole away to Swe-
denborgian services. Her spirits continued to
to tell her that she was a religious figure of
great importance. Returning to her academic
life in Korea she fell ill with chronic diarrhea
and eventually nephritis, both of which re-
sisted all medical treatment. After two years
of this, her health was broken and she was
completely bedridden. At this time her servant
took her to see Chang.
T h u s is summarized a portrait of a des-
perately estranged maiden lady, with secret
convictions of grandeur, frequent "hetero-
dox" hallucinations, a n d failing health, who
felt herself badly entangled i n the mundane
affairs of modern religious bureaucracy
8 It is currently fashionable to reduce this last
to more mundane "real" causes, but it is not neces-
sary here to pre-judge the phenomenology.
Although the cultural context is rather
different, the cases of Bertha a n d Lester
follow lines rather similar to Miss Lee's,
but include a n important sexual theme.
Bertha, 29 a t conversion, was the daughter
of German immigrants and was raised in a
suburban town. After high school she at-
tended a modeling school, the kind operated
in large cities for naive, fame-hungry girls,
regardless of suitability. She returned to
marry a local boy who was employed as a
stereotyper in a printing plant. On her wed-
ding night she spent two hours locked in their
hotel bathroom, and subsequently did not im-
prove her evaluation of sexual intercourse.
Later the couple separated briefly, reunited,
and after five years of marriage had their
first child (1955). The second came in 1957,
and they moved to the West Coast. There
Bertha began having private religious hallu-
cinations, including "sanctification"-being
made holy and free of all sin. She went to
various ministers to tell of her marvelous
experiences, but was not warmly received;
indeed, most advised psychiatric help. She
began, then, t o tell her husband that one day
she would be very important in the service of
the Lord. Follotving a homosexual episode
116th a neighbor woman, Bertha demanded
to be taken elsewhere and the family went to
Northwest Town in April 1959. There they
settled in rural Elm Knoll, a collection of half
a dozen houses about seven miles from town.
This 'ivas soon to be the scene of the initial
formation of the cult group, and here she
came to knotv two neighbors, Minne Mae
and Alice. These young housewives drew the
attention of other neighbors by spending
many hours hanging around the nearby gen-
eral store, sometimes drinking beer and often
complaining a good deal about their hus-
bands. During this period, Bertha attended
churches of various denominations and con-
tinued to have frequent ecstatic religious ex-
periences, mostly while sitting alone in a
clump of bushes near her house, where she
was a!so reported to have spent a good deal of
time crying and moaring.
Like Miss Lee, Lester (25 at conversion)
went to a seminary (Lutheran) after a series
of hallucinatory, spiriutalistic experiences and
aroused a good deal of curiosity and opposi-
tion among his fellows and the faculty. H e
left after an abortive part-time year to take
up full-time graduate work in linguistics at
a large state university in the same Bay City
as the seminary. He remained convinced he
was destined to be a one-man revitalization
movement in the church. He took an extremely
active role in campus student religious pro-
grams, meanwhile increasing his preoccupa-
tion with spiritualism and his own psychic
experiences. For his first full-time year of
graduate school he was awarded a Woodrow
866 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW
Wilson fellowship. But he was much more
concerned about his religious life, and a new
interest: he went to live with a young Hun-
garian ex-aristocrat, well-known in the area
as a practicing homosexual. The young Hun-
garian led Lester to organized Spiritualism,
where his religious preoccupations and hallu-
cinations were greatly reinforced and in-
creased, but Lester found these groups want-
ing. They contented themselves with very
mundane affairs and seemed uninterested in
speculations on larger theological matters. I n
addition, Lester was very ambivalent about
his homosexuality, unable to explain it, un-
able to accept it, and unable to quit it. Then
he met Miss Lee.
Bertha's friend, Minnie Mae, did n o t
aspire to significant status, religious o r other-
wise. She pined, rather, for t h e more modest
goal of marital satisfaction.
Minnie Mae (27 a t conversion) was born in
Possum Trot, Arkansas, of hillbilly farmers.
She was one of 11 children, began dating at
12, and married a t 15, having completed
only rural elementary school. She and her
young husband left Arkansas for lack of jobs
and settled in Northwest Town. Her husband
took a job as a laborer in a plywood factory.
Although the young couple did not join a
church, they came from a religious back-
ground (Minnie Mae's mother was a Pente-
costal lay preacher), and they began attend-
ing tent meetings near Northwest Town.
During one of these Minnie Mae began speak-
ing in "tongues" and fell into a several-hour
trance. After this her husband discouraged
church activities. The couple had three chil-
dren at roughly two year intervals, and until
1960 Minnie Mae seems to have spent most
of her time caring for these children and
watching television. She reported tuning in a
local channel when she got up in the morning
and keeping it on until sign-off a t night. I n
1958 the couple built a small house in Elm
Knoll. Here, in her behavior and conversa-
tions with neighbors, she began to reveal se-
vere dissatisfactions in her marriage. She re-
peatedly complained that her husband only
had intercourse with her about once a month,
but she also reported being very afraid of
getting pregnant again. Furthermore, she
wanted to get out and have some fun, go
dancing, etc., but her husband only wanted to
watch TV and to fish. She wondered if she
had let life pass her by because she had been
married too young. And, often, she com-
plained about her husband's opposition t o
fundamentalist religious activities.
M e w i n and Alice followed quite a differ-
e n t pattern. Theirs was n o t a n intensely
religious concern, indeed their grandiose
ambitions were for fortune.
Merwin (29 at conversion) was raised in a
Kansas hamlet where his father was the rail-
road depot agent. After high school he tried a
small Kansas junior college for a year, did
poorly, and joined the Marines. Discharged in
1952, he spent one year at the University of
Kansas majoring in architecture, and did well,
so he transferred to what he felt was a better
school in Northwest Town. Here he didn't
do well and adopted a pattern of frequently
dropping out, then going back. Estranged and
alone, he bought a few acres in Elm Knoll
with a small ramshackle cottage and took up
a recluse's existence-he rarely shaved or
washed, brewed his own beer, and dabbled
in health foods, left-wing political writings,
and occult publications, while supporting
himself by working in a plywood plant. Next
door, about 20 yards away, lived Alice, her
two children and her husband, also a plywood
plant worker. Alice's husband, however,
worked a swine shift. while Menvin worked
days. The resdt was'that Alice filed for di-
vorce and moved over to Merwin's. The hus-
band departed without undue resistance. After
their marriage, Menvin began to put his plans
for financial empires into action. He consid-
ered a housing development, a junkyard, and
finally bought a large frame house in North-
west Town to convert into a boarding house
for students. After he had bought furniture
and made other investments in the property,
the city condemned it. Merwin filed bank-
ruptcy and returned to Elm Knoll to lick his
wounds and contemplate his next business
venture. Merwin had long been disaffected
with the established religions, had considered
himself an agnostic, but was also interested
in the occult. These interests were developed
by his work partner, Elmer, whom we shall
meet in a moment.
Alice, also a small town girl, had traded for
what she felt was a better man, one who was
"going places," but these hopes seemed to
be fading after the bankruptcy. She still
bragged to Minnie Mae and Bertha that
Merwin would be a big man someday, but
there was little evidence to support her.
Elmer's case illustrates y e t another kind
of frustrated ambition, t h a t of attaining
status as a m a n of knowledge a n d invention.
E l ~ ~ z e rwas born on a farm in North Dakota
but his parents fled the drought and depres-
sion for the West Coast during the late
thirties and settled on a farm near North-
west Town. Elmer, 26 a t the time of his con-
version, was slightly built with something
of a vacant stare. After high school, he
flunked out of the university after one semes-
ter and spent the next two years in the army
where he flunked medical technician school.
After the army he enrolled in a nearby state
college and again lasted only one semester.
867CONVERSION T O A DEVIANT PERSPECTIVE
He then returned to his parents' farm and
took a job in the plywood factory. Elmer
conceived of himself as an intellectual and
aspired to be a learned man. He undertook to
educate himself, and collected a large library
toward this end. Unfortunatelv. he was virtu-
ally illiterate. In addition to'more conven-
tional books (including much of the Random
House Modem Library), he subscribed to
occult periodicals such as Fate, Flying Sau-
cers, Search, etc. He also viewed himself as
a practical man of invention, a young Thomas
Edison, and dreamed of constructing revolu-
tionary gadgets. He actually began assembling
materials for a tiny helicopter (to use for
herding cattle) and a huge television antenna
to bring in stations hundreds of miles away.
On top of all this, Elmer was unable to speak
to others above a whisper and looked con-
stantly at his feet while talking. Furthermore,
he had great difficulty sustaining a conversa-
tion, often appearing to forget what he was
talking about. But despite his "objective"
failures at intellectual accomplishment, Elmer
clung to a belief in his own potential. The
consequences of failure were largely to make
him withdraw, to protect this self image from
his inability to demonstrate it.
These case histories provide a concrete
notion of the kinds of things that bothered
pre-converts. These problems apparently
are not qualitatively different from the prob-
lems presumably experienced by a signifi-
cant, albeit unknown, proportion of the gen-
eral population. Their peculiarity, if any,
appears to be that pre-converts felt their
problems were quite acute, and they ex-
perienced high levels of tension concerning
them over rather long periods.
From the point of view of an outside ob-
server, however, their circumstances were
not extraordinarily oppressive; in the gen-
eral population, many persons undoubtedly
labor under tensions considerably more acute
and prolonged. Perhaps the strongest quali-
tative generalization supported by the data
is that pre-converts felt themselves frus-
trated in their rather diverse aspirations.
Most people probably have some type of
frustrated aspiration, but pre-converts ex-
perienced the tension rather more acutely
and over longer periods than most people
do.
Explanation cannot rest here, for such
tensions could have resulted in any number
of other resolutions, and in fact they usually
do. Thus, these unresolved problems in liv-
ing are part of the necessary scenery for the
stage, but the rest of the props, the stage
itself, and the drama of conversion remain
to be constructed.
2 . T y p e of Problem-Sozving Perspective.
Since conversion to the D.P. is hardly the
only thing people can do about their prob-
lems, it becomes important to ask what else
these particular people could have done, and
why they didn't. Because people have a
number of conventional and readily avail-
able alternative definitions for, and means
of coping with, their problems, there were,
in the end, very few converts to the D.P.
An alternative solution is a perspective or
rhetoric defining the nature and sources of
problems in living and offering some pro-
gram for their resolution. Many such alter-
native solutions exist in modern society.
Briefly, three particular genres of solution
are relevant here: the psychiatric, the politi-
cal and the religious. In the first, the origin
of problems is typically traced to the psyche,
and manipulation of the self is advocated as
a solution. Political solutions, mainly radi-
cal, locate the sources of problems in the
social structure and advocate reorganiza-
tion of the system as a solution. The reli-
gious perspective tends to see both sources
and solutions as emanating from an unseen
and, in principle, unseeable realm.
The first two secular rhetorics bear the
major weight of usage in contemporary so-
ciety. No longer is it considered appropriate
to regard recalcitrant and aberrant actors
as possessed of devils. Indeed, modern
religious institutions tend to offer a secular,
frequently psychiatric, rhetoric concerning
problems in living. The prevalence of secu-
lar definitions of tension is a major reason
for the scarcity of D.P. converts. Several
persons, whose circumstances met other con-
ditions of the model, had adopted a psy-
chiatric definition of their tensions and
failed to become converts. In one exag-
gerated instance, an ex-GI literally alter-
nated residence between the D.P. head-
quarters and the psychiatric ward of the
veterans' hospital, never able to make a
final decision as to which rhetoric he should
adopt.
All pre-converts were surprisingly unin-
formed about conventional psychiatric and
political perspectives for defining their prob-
lems. Perhaps those from small towns and
868 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW
rural communities in particular had long
been accustomed to define the world in
religious terms. Although all pre-converts
had discarded conventional religious out-
looks as inadequate, "spiritless," L'dead,"
etc., prior to contact with the D.P., they
retained a general propensity to i~nposereli-
gious meaning on events.
Even with these restrictions on the solu-
tions available for acutely felt problems, a
number of alternative responses still remain.
First, people can persist in stressful situa-
tions with little or no relief. Second, persons
often take specifically problem-directed ac-
tion to change troublesome portions of their
lives, without adopting a different world
view to interpret them. Bertha and Minnie
Mae might have simply divorced their hus-
bands, for instance, and presumably, Lester
could have embraced homosexuality. Clearly
many pre-converts attempted such action
(Merwin did start a boarding house, Elmer
did attend college, etc.) but none found a
successful direct solution to his difficulties.
Third, a number of maneuvers exist to
"put the problem out of mind." In general
these are com~ensationsfor or distractions
from problems in living: e.g., addictive con-
sumption of the mass media, pre-occupation
with child-rearing, or immersion in work.
More spectacular examples include alcohol-
ism, suicide, promiscuity, and so on. Recall,
for example, that Minnie Mae, Alice and
Bertha "hung around" the general store dur-
ing the day getting high on beer during the
summer of 1959. Had they done this in a
more urban setting, in bars with strange
men available, their subsequent lives migh.t
have been different.
In any event, we may assume that many
persons with tensions not only explore these
possible strategies, but succeed in some cases
in "making it," and hence, are no longer
potential D.P. recruits?
3. Seekership. Whatever the reasons, pre-
converts failed to find a way out of their
9 Our analysis is confined to isolating the ele-
ments of the conversion sequence. Extended anal-
ysis would refer to the factors that in turn bring
each conversion condition into existence. That is,
it would be necessary to develop a theory for each
of the seven elements, specifying the conditions un-
der which each appears. On the form such theory
would probably take, see Ralph Turner's discus-
sion of "the instrusive factor,'' op. cit., pp. 609-611.
difficulties through any of the strategies out-
lined above. Their need for solutions per-
sisted, and their problem-solving perspective
was restricted to a religious outlook, but
all pre-converts found conventional religious
institutions inadeauate as a source of solu-
tions. Subsequently, each came to define
himself as a religious seeker, a person search-
ing for some satisfactory system of religious
meaning to interpret and resolve his dis-
content, and each had taken some action
to achieve this end.
Some hopped from church to church and
prayer group to prayer group, pursuing their
religious search through relatively conven-
tional institutions. A male convert in his
early twenties recounted:
My religious training consisted of various de-
nominations such as Baptist, Methodist, Con-
gregationalist, Jehovah's Witnesses and Ca-
tholicism. Through all my experiences, I
refused to accept . . . religious dogma . . .
because it was Truth I \\-as seeking, and not
a limited belief or concept.
Others began to explore the occult milieu,
reading the voluminous literature of the
strange, the mystical and the spiritual and
tentatively trying a series of such occult
groups as Rosicr~icians,Spiritcalists and the
various divine sciences.
I n April, 1960, my wife and I . . . [began]
to seek a church connection. [We] began an
association with Yokefellow, a spiritual
growth organization in our local church. My
whole religious outlook took on a new mean-
ing and a broader vision. I grew emotionally
and spiritually during the next two and one
half years.
Wo~vever,as I grew, many spiritunl things
remained unanswered and new questions came
up demanding ans.il-ers which Yokefellow and
the Church seemed not to even begin to
touch upon. . . . M y wife and I became in-
terested in the revelation of Edgar Cayce and
the idea of reincarnation which seemed to
answer so much, we read searchingly about
the Dead Sea Scrolls, we decided to pursue
Rosicrucianism, we read books on the secret
disclosures to be gained from Yogi-type medi-
tation. The more we searched the more ques-
tions seemed to come up. Through Emmet
Fox's writings I thought I had discovered a
path through Metaphysics which through
study would give me the breakthrough I
longed for.
Or, the seeker might display some amalgam
of conventional and unusual religious con-
869CONVERSION TO A DEVIANT PERSPECTIVE
ceptions, as illustrated by a male convert's
sad tale:
I was reared in a Pentecostal church and as a
child was a very ardent follotver of Christi-
anity. Because of family situations, I began
to fall away and search for other meanings in
life. This began . . . when I was about 1 2
years old. From that time on, my life was
most of the time an odious existence, with a
great deal of mental anguish. These last two
years have brought me from church to
church trying to find some fusion among
them. I ended up going to Religious Science
in the morning and fundamentalist in the
evening.
Floundering about among religions was
accompanied by two fundamental postulates
that define more specifically the ideological
components of the religious-seeker pattern.
Although concrete pre-convert beliefs varied
a good deal, all of them espoused these
postulates about the nature of ultimate
reality.
First, they believed that spirits of some
variety came from an active supernatural
realm to intervene in the "material world."
Such entities could, a t least sometimes,
"break through" from the beyond and im-
part information, cause "experiences" or
take a hand in the course of events.
Second, their conception of the universe
was teleological, in the sense that beyond
all appearances in the "sensate world" exists
a purpose for which every object or event
is created and exists. The earth is as it is
to meet the needs of man, for example, and
man manifests the physical structure he does
Yo do the things he does. More important,
man himself as a phenomenon must "be on
earth" because, somewhere, sometime, some-
how, it was decided that homo sapiens
should "fulfill" a purpose or purposes. AC-
cordingly, each person must have been "put
on earth" for some reason, with some sort
of "job" to perform.
Beliefs were typically no more specific
than this. The religious seeking itself was
in terms of finding some more detailed
formulation of these problematically vague
existential axes.
A few words on the general question of
the importance of prior beliefs in effecting
conversion are necessary a t this point. A
number of discussions of conversion have
emphasized congruence between previous
ideology and a given group's "appeal," lo
while others treat the degree of congruence
as unimportant so long as the ideology is
seen as embodied in what appears to be a
successful movement.ll Both views seem
extreme.12
Our data suggest that only the two gross
kinds of congruence that make up the
ideology of religious seekership are neces-
sary for conversion to the D.P. Presump-
tively important items, such as fundamen-
talist Christianity, millenarian expectations,
and hallucinatory experience were far from
universal among pre-converts. Most pre-
converts believed in a vaguely defined "New
Age" that m7ould appear gradually, but they
became apocalyptic pre-millenarian only
upon conversion.
The role of these gross points of con-
gruence is suggested in the substantive D.P.
appeals to pre-converts. Active spirits were
rampant in their view of reality. Converts
lived with an immediate sense of unseen
forces operating on the physical order (e.g.,
the weather) and intervening in human af-
fairs-in relations among nations, in the
latest national disaster, and in their own
moment-to-moment lives. Nothing occurred
that was not related to the intentions of
God's or Satan's spirits. For persons hold-
ing a teleological conception of reality, the
D.P. doctrine had the virtue of offering a
minute and lawful explanation of the whole
of human history. I t systematically defined
and revealed the hidden meaning of indi-
vidual lives that had lacked coherence and
purpose, and of course, it explained all
hallucinatory behavior in terms of spirit
manifestations. These spirits had been pre-
paring the pre-convert to see the truth of
the D .P.
Although acute and enduring tensions in
the form of frustrated aspirations is not an
ideological component, in the sense of being
a more abstract postulate about the nature
loE.g., H . G. Brown, "The Appeal of Commu-
nist Ideology," American Journal of Economics
and Sociology, 2 (1943), pp. 161-174; Gabriel
Almond, T h e Appeals of Communisnz, Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1954.
11 E.g., Eric Hoffer, T h e True Believer, New
York: Mentor, 1958 (copyright 1951), p. 10.
12 Cf. Herbert Blumer, "Collective Behavior" in
Joseph B. Gittler (ed.), Review of Sociology, New
York: Wiley, 1957, pp. 147-148.
870 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW
of reality, it should be noted here, in rela-
tion to the matter of congruence, that the
D.P. also offered a proximate and major
solution. Converts were assured of being
virtual demi-gods for all eternity, beginning
with a rule over the restored and reformed
earth in the immediate future. By 1967 God
was to impose the millennium upon earth,
and those who converted early, before the
truth of this message became self-evident,
would occupy the most favored positions in
the divine hegemony. Converts particularly
stressed this advantage of conversion in their
proselytization: "those who get in early," as
one member often put it, "will be in on the
ground floor of something big."
Religious seekership emerges, then, as an-
other part of the path through the maze of
life contingencies leading to D.P. conversion.
I t is a floundering among religious alterna-
tives, an openness to a variety of religious
views, frequently esoteric, combined with
failure to embrace the specific ideology and
fellowship of some set of believers.13 Seek-
ership provided the minimal points of ideo-
logical congruence to make these people
available for D.P. conversion.
4. The Turning Point. The necessary at-
tributes of pre-converts stated thus far had
all persisted for some time before the pre-
converts encountered the D.P.; they can be
considered "background" factors, or pre-
dispositions. Although they apparently arose
and were active in the order specified, they
are important here as accumulated and
simultaneously active factors during the de-
velopment of succeeding conditions.
We now turn to situational factors in
which timing becomes much more signifi-
cant. The first of these is the rather strik-
ing circumstance that shortly before, and
concurrently with their encounter with the
13 For further suggestive materials on seekers and
seeking see H. T. Dohrman, California Cult, Bos-
ton: Beacon, 1958; Leon Festinger, Henry Riecken
and Stanley Schacter, When Prophecy Fails, Min-
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1956;
Sanctus De Santis, Religious Conversion, London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1927, esp. pp. 26C-261;
H. Taylor Buckner, "Deviant-Group Organiza-
tions," Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of Cali-
fornia, Berkeley, 1964, Ch. 2. For discussion of a
generically similar phenomenon in a different con-
text, see Edgar H. Schein, Coercive Persuasion,
New York: Norton, 1961, pp. 120-136, 270-277.
D.P., all pre-converts had reached or were
about to reach what they perceived as a
"turning point" in their lives. That is, each
had come to a moment when old lines of
action were complete, had failed or been
disrupted, or were about to be so, and when
they faced the opportunity (or necessity),
and possibly the burden, of doing some-
thing different with their lives.14 Thus, Miss
Lee's academic career had been disrupted
by long illness from which she recovered
upon meeting Chang; Bertha was newly
arrived in a strange town; Lester was dis-
affected from graduate studies after having
quit the seminary; Minnie hfae no longer
had a pre-school child a t home to care for;
hlerwin had just failed in business after
dropping out of school; and Elmer had re-
turned to his parents' farm after failing in
college for the second time.
Turning points in general derived from
recent migration; loss of employment ( a
business failure in Merwin's case); and
completion, failure, or withdrawal from
school. Perhaps because most converts were
young adults, turning points involving edu-
cational institutions were relatively frequent.
Illustrations in addition to the cases de-
scribed above are a graduate student who
had just failed his Ph.D. qualifying exami-
nations, two second-semester college seniors
who had vague and unsatisfying plans for
the future, and a seventeen year-old who
had just graduated from high school. Re-
covery from or the onset of an illness, mari-
tal dissolution and other changes, extant or
imminent, such as Minnie Mae's new free-
dom, were relatively infrequent. The signifi-
cance of these various turning points is that
they increased the pre-convert's awareness
of and desire to take some action about his
problems, at the same time giving hinz a
new opportunity to do so. Turning points
were situations in which old obligations and
lines of action were diminished, and new
involvements became desirable and possible.
14Everett C. Hughes, Men and Their Work,
Glencoe: Free Press, 1958, Ch. 1; Anselm Strauss,
"Transformations of Identity," in Arnold Rose
(ed.), Human Behavior and Social Processes, Bos-
ton: Houghton Mifflin, 1962, pp. 67-71. Cf. the
often-noted "cultural dislocation" and migration
pattern found in the background of converts to
many groups, especially cults.
5 7 1CONVERSION TO A IIEVIANT PERSPECTIVE
5. Cult A f e c t i v e Bonds. We come now
to the contact between a potential recruit
and the D.P. If persons who go through all
four of the previous steps are to be further
drawn down the road to full conversion, an
affective bond must develop, if i t does not
already exist, between the potential recruit
and one or more of the D.P. members. The
development or presence of some positive,
emotional, interpersonal response seems nec-
essary to bridge the gap between first ex-
posure to the D.P. message and accepting
its truth. T h a t is, persons developed affec-
tive ties with the group or some of its mem-
bers while they still regarded the D.P.
perspective as problematic, or even "way
out." I n a manner of speaking, final con-
version was coming to accept the opinions
of one's friends.15
Miss Lee's recollections of her conversion
provide a graphic illustration:
In addition to this change [her recovery from
illness] I felt very good spiritually. I felt as
if I had come to life from a numb state and
there was spiritual liveliness and vitality
within me by being a~tzongthis group. As one
feels when he comes from a closed stuffy
room into the fresh air, or the goodness and
warmth after freezing coldness was how my
spirit witnessed its happiness. Although I
could not agree with the message intellectu-
ally I found myself one with it spiritually.
I reserved my conclusions and waited for
guidance from God. [Italics added.]
Miss Lee further revealed she was particu-
larly attracted to Mr. Chang and resided
in his dwelling to enjoy the pleasure of his
company, until, finally, she decided his mes-
sage was true. Her statement that she
"could not agree with the message intel-
lectually" is particularly significant. Other
converts reported and were observed to ex-
perience similar reservations as they never-
theless developed strong bonds with mem-
bers of the group. Thus, for example, Lester,
the most highly intellectual of the converts,
displayed an extremely strong attachment
1 5 Cf. Tamatsu Shibutani, Society and Person-
ality, Englewood Cliffs, N . J.: Prentice-Hall, 1961,
pp. 523-532, 588-592. Schein (op. cit., p. 2 7 7 ) re-
ports that "the most potent source of influence in
coercive persuasion was the identification which
arose between a prisoner and his more reformed
cellmate." See also Alan Kerckhoff, Kurt Back and
Norman Miller, "Sociometric Patterns in Hysterical
Contagion," Sociometry, 28 (1965), pp. 2-15.
to the middle-aged Miss Lee and manifested
the "intellect problem" for some weeks after
he had turned his life over to her. At one
point late in this period he could still reflec-
tively comment to an observer:
I have not entirely reconciled [the D.P. world
view] with my intellect, but [Miss Lee] keeps
answering more and more questions that are
in my mind so I am beginning to close the
holes I have found in it.
I t is particularly important to note that
conversions frequently moved through pre-
existing friendship pairs or nets. I n the
formation of the original core group, an
affective bond first developed between Miss
Lee and Bertha (the first to meet Miss
Lee and begin to espouse her views). Once
that had happened, the rest of the original
conversions were supported by prior friend-
ships. Bertha was part of the housewife trio
of Minnie bIae and Alice; Merwin was
Alice's husband, and Elmer was Merwin's
friend and workmate. Subsequent conver-
sions also followed friendship paths, or
friendships developed between the pre-
convert and the converts, prior to conver-
sion.
Bonds that were unsupported by previous
friendships with a new convert often took
the form of a sense of instant and powerful
rapport with a believer. Consider, for ex-
ernple a young housewife's account of her
first view of Lester while attending an Edgar
Cayce Foundation retreat: l6
I went to [one of the] Bible class[es] and
saw [Lester] in our class-I had seen him
for the first time the night before and had
felt such love for him-he was my brother,
yet I had not met him. He looked as if he
were luminous! After the class I wanted to
talk to him-but our project group had a
discipline that day-complete silence-I did
not want to break it, yet I felt such a need
to talk to him. I prayed and asked God ~vhat
He would have me do-I received such a
positive feeling-I took this as an answer
and sought out [Lester]. When I found him,
I did not have anything to say-I just
mumbled something-But he seemed to un-
derstand and took me to the beach where he
told me "He is on earth!" Oh, uhat joy I
16 Lester was at this retreat precisely for the
purpose o i meeting potential converts. Attendance
at religious gatherings in the masquerade of a re-
ligious seeker was the primary D.P. mode of re-
cruiting.
872 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW
felt! My whole body was filled with elec-
tricity.
The less-than-latent sexual overtones of this
encounter appeared in a number of other
heterosexual attachments that led to con-
version (and quite a few that did not).
Even after four years of cult membership
Elmer could hardly hide his feelings in this
testimonial :
Early in 1960, after a desperate prayer,
which was nothing more than the words,
"Father if there is any truth in this world,
please reveal it to me," I met [Miss Lee].
This day I desire to never forget. Although
I didn't fully understand yet, I desired to
unite with her. . . .
Although a potential convert might have
some initial difficulty in taking u p the D.P.
perspective, given the four previous condi-
tions and a n affective tie, he began seriously
to consider the D.P. and to accept it a s his
personal construction of reality.
6. Extra-Cult Afiective Bonds. One might
suppose that non-D.P. associates of a con-
vert-in-process would not be entirely neu-
tral to the now immediate possibility that
he would join the D.P. group. We must
inquire, then, into the conditions under
which extra-cult controls are activated
through emotional attachments, and how
they restrain or fail to restrain persons from
D.P. conversion.
Recent migration, disaffection with geo-
graphically distant families and spouses and
very few nearby acquaintences made a few
converts "social atoms;" for them extra-
cult attachments were irrelevant. More
typically, converts were acquainted with
nearby persons, but none was intimate
enough to be aware that a conversion was
in progress or to feel that the mutual at-
tachment was sufficient t o justify interven-
tion. Thus, for example, Lester's social round
was built primarily around participation in
religious groups. Although he was well-
known and appreciated for his contribu-
tions, he was not included in any local circles
of intimacy. Many people knew him, but
no one was a perso%al friend. Further, Les-
ter's relations with both parents and step-
parents manifested considerable strain and
ambivalence, and his homosexual liaison
was shot through with strain.
I n many cases, positive attachments out-
side the cult were to other religious seekers,
who, even though not yet budding converts
themselves, encouraged continued "investi-
gation" or entertainment of the D.P. rather
than exercising a countervailing force. In-
deed, such an extra-cult person might be
only slightly behind his friend in his own
conversion process.
I n the relatively few cases where positive
attachments existed between conventional
extra-cult persons and a convert-in-process,
control was minimal or absent, because of
geographical distance or intentional avoid-
ance of communication about the topic while
the convert was solidifying his faith. Thus,
for example, a German immigrant in his
earlv thirties failed to inform his mother in
Germany, to whom he was strongly attached,
during his period of entertainment and only
wrote her about the D.P. months after his
firm acceptance. (She disowned him.)
During the period of tentative acceptance,
and afterwards, converts, of course, pos-
sessed a rhetoric that helped to neutralize
affective conflicts. An account by a newly
converted soldier in Oklahoma conveys the
powerful (and classic) content of this facili-
tating and justifying rhetoric:
I wrote my family a very long detailed but
yet very plain letter about our movement
and exactly what I received in spiritual ways
plus the fact that Jesus had come to me him-
self. The weeks passed and I heard nothing
but I waited with deep trust in God.
This morning I received a letter from my
mother. She . . .surmised that I was working
with a group other than those with the "stamp
of approval by man." She . . . called me a
fanatic, and went on to say: "My fervent
constant prayer is that time will show you
the fruitlessness of the way you have chosen
before it consumes you entirely. A real true
religion is deep in the heart and shines
through your countenance for all to see. One
need not shout it to the house tops either."
At first it was the deepest hurt I had ever
experienced. But, I remember what others in
[the D.P.] family have given up and how
they too experienced a similar rejection. But
so truly, I can now know a little of the re-
jection that our beloved Master experienced.
I can now begin to understand his deep grief
for the Father as he sat peering out of a win-
dow singing love songs to Him because he
knew that the Father would feel such grief. I
can now begin to feel the pain that our Fa-
ther in heaven felt for 6,000 years. I can now
begin to see that to come into the Kingdom
CONVERSION TO A DEVIANT PERSPECTIVE
of heaven is not as easy as formerly thought.
I can now see why many are called but few
are chosen. I began to understand why men
will be separated, yes even from their fam-
ilies. I begin to see the shallowness of human
concern for God as a Father and their true
blindness. Oh my heart cries out to Our
Father in greatful [sic] praise and love for
what He has given.
* * *
[In the words of Miss Lee:] "As we get
close to the Father the road shall become
more difficult;" "Only by truly suffering, can
we know the Leader and the heart of the
Father;" "You shall be tested." "He will
come with a double-edged blade." Only now
am I beginning to realize the deep signifi-
cance of these words. Only now am I begin-
ning to know the heart of the Father and the
great suffering of our Lord.
When there were emotional attachments
to outsiders who were physically present and
cognizant of the incipient transformation,
conversion became a "nip-and-tuck" affair.
Pulled about by competing emotional loyal-
ties and discordant versions of reality, such
persons were subjected to intense emotional
strain. A particularly poignant insta~lceof
this involved a newly-wed senior a t the local
state university. He began tentatively to
espouse the D.P. as he developed strong ties
with Lester and Miss Lee. His young wife
struggled to accept, but she did not meet a
number of the conditions leading to conver-
sion, and in the end, seemed nervous, em-
barrassed, and even ashamed to be at D.P.
gatherings. One night, just before the group
began a prayer meeting, he rushed in and
tearfully announced that he would have
nothing further to do with the D.P., though
he still thought the message was probably
true. Torn between affective bonds, he opted
for his young bride, but it was only months
later that he finally lost all belief in the
D .P.
When extra-cult bonds withstood the
strain of affective and ideological flirtation
with the D.P., conversion was not consum-
mated. Most converts, however, lacked ex-
ternal affiliations close enough to permit in-
formal control over belief. Affectively, they
were so "unintegrated" that they could, for
the most part, simply fall out of relatively
conventional society unnoticed, taking their
co-seeker friends, if any, with them.
7. Intensive Interaction. I n combination,
the six previous factors suffice to bring a
person to verbal conversion to the D.P. but
one more contingency must be met if he
is to become a "deployable agent," l7 or
what we have termed a total convert. Most,
but not all, verbal converts ultimately put
their lives a t the disposal of the cult. Such
transformations in commitment took place,
we suggest, as a result of intensive interac-
tion with D.P. members, and failed to result
when such interaction was absent.
Intensive interaction means concrete,
daily, and even hourly accessibility to D.P.
members, which implies physical proximity
to total converts. Intensive exposure offers
an opportunity to reinforce and elaborate
an initial, tentative assent to the D.P. world
view, and in prolonged association the per-
spective "comes alive" as a device for inter-
preting the moment-to-moment events in the
convert's life.
The D.P. doctrine has a variety of re-
sources for explicating the most minor every-
day events in terms of a cosmic battle
between good and evil spirits, in a way that
placed the convert a t the center of this war.
Since all D.P. interpretations pointed to
the imminence of the end, to participate in
these explications of daily life was to come
more and more to see the necessity of one's
personal participation as a totally committed
agent in this cosmic struggle.18
Reminders and discussion of the need to
make other converts, and the necessity of
supporting the cause in every way, were
the main themes of verbal exchanges among
the tentatively accepting and the total con-
verts, and, indeed, among the total converts
themselves. Away from this close association
with those already totally committed, one
failed to "appreciate" the need for one's
transformation into a total convert.
I n recognition of this fact, the D.P. mem-
bers gave highest priority to attempts to
persuade verbal converts (even the merely
interested) to move into the cult's commu-
nal dwellings. During her early efforts in
Northwest Town, Miss Lee gained verbal
conversions from Bertha, Minnie Mae, Alice,
1 7 0 , t h e concept of t h e "deployable agent" or
"deployable personnel" i n social m o v e m e n t s see
Philip Selznick, The Organizational Weapon, New
Y o r k : T h e Free Press, 1960 ( c o p y r i g h t 1 9 5 2 ) , pp.
18-29.
1 8 Cf. Schein, op. cif., pp. 136-139, 280-282.
874 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW
Merwin, and Elmer, many months before
she was able to turn them into total con-
verts. This transformation did not occur,
in fact, until Miss Lee moved into Alice
and Merwin's home (along with Elmer),
placing her within a few dozen yards of the
homes of Minnie Mae and Bertha. The re-
sulting daily exposure of the verbal con-
verts to Miss Lee's total conversion increas-
ingly engrossed them in D.P. activities,
until they came to give it all their personal
and material resources.le Recalling this
period, Minnie Mae reported a process that
occurred during other verbal converts'
periods of intensive interaction. When one
of them began t o waver in his faith, un-
wavering believers were fortunately present
to carry him through this "attack of Satan."
Most verbally assenting converts were
induced out of this tenuous state, through
contrived or spontaneous intensive inter-
action, within a few weeks, or more typi-
cally, a few months. I n a few instances
the interval between assent and total com-
mitment spanned a year or more. When the
unmarried older sister of the German im-
migrant mentioned above came to entertain
the D.P. perspective, some l 1 months of
and not-so-subtle pressures were re-
quired to get her to leave her private apart-
ment and move into the communal dwelling.
Within two months she went from rather
lukewarm belief to total dedication and sub-
sequent return to Germany as a D.P. mis-
sionary. The following ecstatic testimonial
given during her second month of cult resi-
dence contrasts sharply with her previously
reserved and inhibited statements:
In the beginning of May I moved into our
center in [Bay City]. A complete new life
started for me. Why had I not cut off my
19Although a number of our illustrative cases
are drawn from the period of the group's forma-
tion, the process of cult formation itself should not
be confused with the analytically distinct process of
conversion. The two are merely empirically com-
pounded. Cult formation occurs when a network
of friends who meet the first four conditions de-
velop affective bonds with a world-view carrier and
collectively develop the last two conditions, except
that condition seven, intensive interaction, requires
exposure t o each other in addition to the world-
view carrier. (For a different conception of "sub-
culture" formation see Albert K. Cohen, Delin-
quent Boys, Glencoe, Ill.: The Free Press, 1955,
Ch. 3.)
self-centered life earlier! Here under [Miss
Lee's] care and guidance I felt God's power
and love tremendously and very soon it be-
came my only desire to wholeheartedly serve
our Father. How fortunate I am being a child
and student of our beloved mother and
teacher, [Miss Lee]. She reflects in all her
gestures, words and works the love and wis-
dom of our Lord and Master.
Thus, verbal conversion and even a reso-
lution to reorganize one's life for the D.P. is
not automatically translated into total con-
version. One must be intensively exposed to
the group supporting these new standards of
conduct. D.P. members did not find prosely-
tizing, the primary task of total converts,
very easy, but in the presence of persons
who reciprocally supported each other, such
a transformation of one's life became possi-
ble. Persons who accepted the truth of the
doctrine, but lacked intensive interaction
with the core group, remained partisan spec-
tators, who played no active part in the
battle to usher in God's kingdom.
SUMMARY
we have presented a model of the accu-
mulating conditions that appear to describe
and account for conversion to an obscure
millenarian perspective. These necessary and
c~~stel~ationa~ly~suf6cientconditions may be
summarized as follows:
For conversion a person must:
1.Experience enduring, acutely felt ten-
sions
2. Within a religious problem-solving per-
spective,
3. Which leads him to define himself as a
religious seeker ;
4. Encountering the D.P. a t a turning
point in his life,
5. Wherein an affective bond is formed
(or pre-exists) with one or more con-
verts ;
6. Where extra-cult attachments are ab-
sent or neutralized;
7. And, where, if he is to become a deploy-
able agent, he is exposed to intensive
interaction.
Because this model was developed from
the study of a small set of converts to a
minor millenarian doctrine, i t may possess
few generalizable features. We suggest, how-
875DURKHEIM AND SUICIDE
ever, that its terms are general enough, and
its elements articulated in such a way as to
provide a reasonable starting point for the
study of conversion to other types of groups
and perspectives.
A closing caveat. The D.P. had few com-
petitive advantages, if any, over other un-
usual religious groups, in terms of the po-
tential converts' predispositions. I n terms
of situational conditions the D.P. advantage
was simply that they were on the scene and
able to make their "pitch," develop affective
bonds and induce intensive interaction. We
hope our effort will help dispel the tendency
to assume some "deep," almost mystical,
connection between world views and their
carriers. Like conceptions holding that crim-
inals and delinquents must be '(really differ-
ent," our thinking about other deviants has
too often assumed some extensive charac-
terological conjunction between participant
and pattern of participation.
DURKHEIM'S ONE CAUSE O F SUICIDE *
BARCLAYD. JOHNSON
University of California, Berkeley
I n this paper I attempt to clarify Dzirkheim's theory o f suicide rates. He maintains that t w o
social variables, integration and regulation, joilttly determine rates of suicide. A high rate is
caused b y an extreme condition of integration (egoism or altruism) or of regulation (anonzie
or fatalism), or b y some combination of extrenze conditions. A closer look at Suicide sug-
gests, however, that altruism and fatalisnz really do ?tot belong i n Durkheinz's scheme, and
that egoism and anomie are identical. Thus, his four causes o f suicide can be reduced t o one,
so that all variation in suicide rates is attributed to a single cause.
ALTHOUGH Durkheim's Suicide is among
the most widely read classics in our
field, sociologists rarely seek to clarify
the theory it contains. The present paper is
devoted to this task. I shall formulate Durk-
heim's theory in a manner harmonious both
with his own words and with the demands
of logical consistency. I n the process, I shall
call attention to certain inconsistencies in
his argument, and try to resolve them. Since
this is primarily an attempt to understand
Durkheim, I shall not attempt to "improve"
the theory by introducing changes of my
own invention.
The aforementioned purpose is a restricted
one, and should be clearly distinguished from
several related endeavors. Some of the things
I will not attempt to do are the following:
( 1) Evaluate Durkheim's empirical claims
about suicide rates of particular groups.'
* I am grateful to Neil J. Smelser, Kenneth E.
Bock, Max Heirich, and R. Stephen Warner for
their help in the preparation of this paper.
1 For comments on this question, see Jack P.
Gibbs, "Suicide," in Robert K. Merton and Robert
A. Nisbet (eds.), Contemporary Social Problenzs,
New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1961, pp.
222-261, passim.
This is a study in theory, not an examina-
tion of the incidence of suicide. ( 2 ) Review
studies of suicide rates carried out since
Durkheim's days2 (3) Interpret and collate
the work of various authors who have elab-
orated such Durkheimean concepts as "in-
tegration" and "anomie." (4) Present a
new theory of suicide, or new data pertain-
ing to ~ u i c i d e . ~
2 Ibid. On the question of the validity of suicide
statistics, see Warren Breed, "Occupational Mobil-
ity and Suicide Among White Males," American
Sociological Review, 2 8 (1963), esp. pp. 181-182.
A recent review of data on suicide is in Louis I.
Dublin, Suicide, New York: Ronald Press, 1963.
3On concepts of "integration," see Werner S.
Idandecker, "Types of Integration and Their Meas-
urement," in Paul F. Lazarsfeld and Morris Rosen-
berg (eds.), T h e Language of Social Research,
Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1955, pp. 19-27. On
concepts of "anomie," articles and books have been
appearing at an astonishing rate, to a great extent
stimulated by Robert K. Merton, "Social Structure
and Anomie," in Social Theory and Social Struc-
ture, Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1957, Ch. 4.
4 Theories of suicide rates are offered in a t least
two recent books: Andrew F. Henry and James
F. Short, Jr., Suicide and Hotnicide, Glencoe, Ill.:
Free Press, 1954, and Jack P. Gibbs and Walter
T. Martin, Status Integration and Suicide, Eugene:
You have printed the following article:
Becoming a World-Saver: A Theory of Conversion to a Deviant Perspective
John Lofland; Rodney Stark
American Sociological Review, Vol. 30, No. 6. (Dec., 1965), pp. 862-875.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28196512%2930%3A6%3C862%3ABAWATO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Z
This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.
[Footnotes]
5 The Quest for Universals in Sociological Research
Ralph H. Turner
American Sociological Review, Vol. 18, No. 6. (Dec., 1953), pp. 604-611.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28195312%2918%3A6%3C604%3ATQFUIS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-M
9 The Quest for Universals in Sociological Research
Ralph H. Turner
American Sociological Review, Vol. 18, No. 6. (Dec., 1953), pp. 604-611.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28195312%2918%3A6%3C604%3ATQFUIS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-M
15 Sociometric Patterns in Hysterical Contagion
Alan C. Kerckhoff; Kurt W. Back
Sociometry, Vol. 28, No. 1. (Mar., 1965), pp. 2-15.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0038-0431%28196503%2928%3A1%3C2%3ASPIHC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Y
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 1 -
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.