Conversion Motifs
Author(s): John Lofland and Norman Skonovd
Source:
Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion , Dec., 1981, Vol. 20, No. 4 (Dec.,
1981), pp. 373-385
Published by: Wiley on behalf of Society for the Scientific Study of Religion
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1386185
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Wiley and
Society for the Scientific Study of Religion are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to
Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:59:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
SECULARIZATION AND CULT FORMATIONSECULARIZATION AND CULT FORMATION
Durkheim, Emile
1915 The Elementary Forms of the Religious
Life. London: Allen and Unwin.
Gardner, Martin
1957 Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science.
New York: Dover.
Kluegel, James R.
1980 "Denominational mobility: Current
patterns and recent trends." Journal for
the Scientific Study of Religion 19: 26-39.
Melton, J. Gordon
1978 Encyclopedia of American Religions. 2
Vols. Wilmington, N.C.: McGrath (A
Consortium Book).
Stark, Rodney
1981 "Must all religions be supernatural?" In
Bryan Wilson, ed., The Social Impact of
New Religions. New York: Rose of Sharon
Press, Pp. 159-177.
Stark, Rodney and William Sims Bainbridge
1979 "Of churches, sects, and cults: Preliminary
concepts for a theory of religious
movements." Journal for the Scientific
Study of Religion 18: 117-131.
1980a "Networks of faith: Interpersonal bonds
and recruitment to cults and sects."
American Journal of Sociology 85:
1376-1395.
Durkheim, Emile
1915 The Elementary Forms of the Religious
Life. London: Allen and Unwin.
Gardner, Martin
1957 Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science.
New York: Dover.
Kluegel, James R.
1980 "Denominational mobility: Current
patterns and recent trends." Journal for
the Scientific Study of Religion 19: 26-39.
Melton, J. Gordon
1978 Encyclopedia of American Religions. 2
Vols. Wilmington, N.C.: McGrath (A
Consortium Book).
Stark, Rodney
1981 "Must all religions be supernatural?" In
Bryan Wilson, ed., The Social Impact of
New Religions. New York: Rose of Sharon
Press, Pp. 159-177.
Stark, Rodney and William Sims Bainbridge
1979 "Of churches, sects, and cults: Preliminary
concepts for a theory of religious
movements." Journal for the Scientific
Study of Religion 18: 117-131.
1980a "Networks of faith: Interpersonal bonds
and recruitment to cults and sects."
American Journal of Sociology 85:
1376-1395.
1980b "Towards a theory of religion: Religious
commitment." Journal for the Scientific
Study of Religion 19: 114-128.
1981 "Secularization, revival, and cult
formation." The Annual Review of the
Social Sciences of Religion. Vol. 4. The
Hague: Mouton.
In "American-born sects: Initial findings."
press Journal for the Scientific Study of
Religion.
Forth- A Theory of Religion.
coming
Stark, Rodney, William Sims Bainbridge, and Daniel
P. Doyle
1979 "Cults of America: A reconnaissance in
space and time." Sociological Analysis 40:
347-359.
Stark, Rodney, William Sims Bainbridge, and Lori
Kent
Forth- "Cult membership in the roaring
coming twenties."
Stark, Rodney, Daniel P. Doyle, and Jesse Rushing
Forth- "Beyond Durkheim: Religion and
coming suicide."
Wallace, Anthony F. C.
1966 Religion: An Anthropological View. New
York: Random House.
1980b "Towards a theory of religion: Religious
commitment." Journal for the Scientific
Study of Religion 19: 114-128.
1981 "Secularization, revival, and cult
formation." The Annual Review of the
Social Sciences of Religion. Vol. 4. The
Hague: Mouton.
In "American-born sects: Initial findings."
press Journal for the Scientific Study of
Religion.
Forth- A Theory of Religion.
coming
Stark, Rodney, William Sims Bainbridge, and Daniel
P. Doyle
1979 "Cults of America: A reconnaissance in
space and time." Sociological Analysis 40:
347-359.
Stark, Rodney, William Sims Bainbridge, and Lori
Kent
Forth- "Cult membership in the roaring
coming twenties."
Stark, Rodney, Daniel P. Doyle, and Jesse Rushing
Forth- "Beyond Durkheim: Religion and
coming suicide."
Wallace, Anthony F. C.
1966 Religion: An Anthropological View. New
York: Random House.
Conversion Motifs
JOHN LOFLAND*
NORMAN SKONOVD*
The recent renaissance of research on religious conversion, and the varying stresses emerging in
that work, prompt an effort to isolate "conversion motifs." Based on five major and underlying
variations, six motifs are identified: intellectual, mystical, experimental, affectional, revivalist and
coercive. Social psychological and social organizational implications of these patterns are discussed
The study of religious conversion has undergone a research renaissance in re
years. In the wake of the world-wide wave of "new religions" and the resurgence
traditional religions, social scientific and journalistic inquiry into this phenomeno
blossomed. As is to be expected, investigators have stressed different aspects o
conversion process. Focusing on how organized group activities can induce conversi
*John Lofland is a Professor in the Department of Sociology at the University of California, Davis. N
Skonovd is a Research Analyist with the California Youth Authority.
Conversion Motifs
JOHN LOFLAND*
NORMAN SKONOVD*
The recent renaissance of research on religious conversion, and the varying stresses emerging in
that work, prompt an effort to isolate "conversion motifs." Based on five major and underlying
variations, six motifs are identified: intellectual, mystical, experimental, affectional, revivalist and
coercive. Social psychological and social organizational implications of these patterns are discussed
The study of religious conversion has undergone a research renaissance in re
years. In the wake of the world-wide wave of "new religions" and the resurgence
traditional religions, social scientific and journalistic inquiry into this phenomeno
blossomed. As is to be expected, investigators have stressed different aspects o
conversion process. Focusing on how organized group activities can induce conversi
*John Lofland is a Professor in the Department of Sociology at the University of California, Davis. N
Skonovd is a Research Analyist with the California Youth Authority.
( Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 1981, 20 (4): 373-385( Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 1981, 20 (4): 373-385
373373
373373
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:59:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
some employ such concepts as "affective bonds," "programming," or even
control." Others highlight the individual convert's subjective life and what is
the "self-guiding" and "self-induced" side of conversion. Yet others atte
encompass all these aspects and point to various additional facets. Indeed
literature on the topic is becoming so rich and diverse in these and other way
believe a pause and provisional stock-taking is now in order.'
Such a stock-taking is prompted by a sense, moreover, that the difference
conversion experiences which investigators are reporting with increasing freq
not simply a matter of the "theoretical goggles" worn by the researchers
perjorative view, their conceptual blinders. Rather, such differences are inheren
central or key features of conversions themselves. Therefore, we explore the us
of the analytic supposition that there are several major "types" of conversions
"conversion careers." Given this assumption, our yet more restricted aim is to
what we think of as key, critical, orienting, defining, or "motif" experiences
vary across conversions. The notion of a "motif experience" in conversion is, o
side, an effort to attend to accounts of conversion which describe the su
perceptions of the convert. What converts stress in their accounts varies marke
we suspect that the differences are not simply artifacts of the "accounting" p
(Beckford, 1978), biases elicited by researchers, or the result of selective perce
the construction of conversion accounts. Instead, we are suggesting that
subjective conversions actually vary in a number of acute, qualitatively differ
which are best differentiated by their respective "motif experience." "M
experiences," then, are those aspects of a conversion which are most memorab
orienting to the person "doing" or "undergoing" personal transformation
that provide a tone to the event, its pointedness in time, its positive or
affective content, and the like.
However, in so attuning to the convert's subjective experience we do not el
bound entirely by it. We want also - on the other "side" - to "bracket" that
subjective experience in longer, temporal terms and in broader ways than the convert
might be prone to do. We need particularly to look at the objective ways in which the
social organizational aspects of the process differ. Our approach, therefore, strives to
blend phenomenological fidelity with some distance on the perspective to which we are
faithful. Both sides together - salient thematic elements and key experiences
combined with objective situations - may be thought of as making up the "motif" of a
conversion.
By such an approach we hope both to incorporate and to go beyond the kind of
problems James Beckford (1978) poses in his seminal thoughts on "accounting for
conversion." Beckford points out that among Jehovah's Witnesses, at least, there is a
rather formal, public or even official conception of appropriate features of the
conversion experience. The organization provides, in effect, a paradigm which converts
use to pattern their conversion accounts; some aspects are stressed, others
deemphasized or deleted altogether. In the case of the Jehovah's Witnesses, conversion
1. Even though the research outpouring is rich, no comprehensive bibliography has yet been published. We
know of one in the works, however, and we are indebted to Lewis Rambo for sharing his in-progress work with
us. A preliminary version is available as Rambo, 1979. Limitations of space force us to draw quite selectively on
what is, in fact, an enormous body of literature.
374
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:59:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CONVERSION MOTIFS
is expected to be slow, progressive, extremely cognitive and something whi
achieves. Experiences "which smack of sudden or idiosyncratic illumination/revel
[are not... ] reconcilable" with Witness theory (Beckford, 1978: 254).
Some investigators take such molding to pose an insurmountable proble
confining us forever to the study only of molds. We, however, do not consider s
molding or structuring a problem. Instead, we recognize that the conversion exp
itself is partly molded by expectations of what conversion is about or "is like," t
that there is therefore the probability of a relatively "good fit" between the
experiences and paradigmatic accounts. Because it is probable that they reflec
reality" (the first level of social reality), it is our intention here, in part, to delina
variety of conversion accounts (the second level of social reality).
The efforts of analysts may be thought of, indeed, as a third level of social rea
one that tries to keep pace, often unsuccessfully, with the ever-changing charact
the first two levels.
Following tradition, we use the term "conversion" to refer to, in the oft quoted
words of Richard Travisano (1970: 594), "a radical reorganization of identity, meaning,
life." Or, in Max Heirich's felicitous phrases, conversion is "the process of changing a
sense of root reality" or "a conscious shift in one's sense of grounding" (Heirich, 1977:
674).
In overview, we believe it worthwhile to distinguish six "motifs" of conversion.
These and the major variations that distinguish them are depicted in Chart 1. The five
major dimensions along which they vary should not be construed as exhaustive profiles
of features of each type. Instead, they are only major aspects that serve to locate each
in a very large field of possibilities.
CHART 1
CONVERSION MOTIFS
Conversion Motifs
1. Intellectual 2. Mystical 3.Experimental 4. Affectional 5. Revivalist 6. Coercive
1. Degree of low or none or low medium high high
Social none little
Pressure
2. Temporal medium short long long short long
Duration
* 3. Level of medium high low medium high high
' Affective
> Arousal
S 4. Affective illumination awe, curiosity affection love fear
Content love, (& fear) (& love)
fear
5. Belief- belief- belief- participation participation participation participation
Participa- participation participation -belief -belief -belief -belief
tion
Sequence
375
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:59:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
The five major variations that appear most salient in the "raw reality
conversions, in the conversion accounts, and in our "bracketing" of those ac
encompass the traditional trinity of the intellectual, physical, and emotional. T
variation is quite physical in asking the degree to which the actor is subjected t
experiences external social pressure to convert. The second is also physical in in
into the subjective and objective duration of the conversion experience. The thi
fourth focus on affect, the former seeking to gauge the degree of emotional ar
accompanying the experience, the latter concerned with its content. The
dimension seeks to determine the sequential order in which individuals a
religion's cognitive framework and actually participate in its ritual and organiz
activities. As Chart 1 illustrates, it appears rather common for people to partic
actively in their new roles as converts in advance of their cognitive assent
theological implications. In fact, this is a conscious, conspicuous, and sign
aspect of some conversion motifs.
1. Intellectual The first motif we want to single out is as yet relatively uncom
though we expect it to become increasingly important. The "intellectual" m
conversion commences with individual, private investigation of possible "new g
of being," alternate theodicies, personal fulfillment, etc. by reading books, wat
television, attending lectures, and other impersonal or "disembodied" ways in w
is increasingly possible sans social involvement to become acquainted with altern
ideologies and ways of life. In the course of such reconnaissance, some ind
convert themselves in isolation from any actual interaction with devotees
respective religion. A prototypical case is that of sociologist Roger Straus who,
an undergraduate, substantially converted himself to Scientology through exten
reading. His first contact with an actual Scientologist was for the predecided pu
of attaining full membership:
Although I was highly suspicious of any organized group, after several months I concluded that t
only way to check the whole thing out was to take the plunge: I walked into New York Org and ask
the receptionist what I had to do to 'go Clear' and become an auditor (Straus, 1979a: 7).
In the literature, this pattern is spoken of as the "activist" model of conver
(Lofland, 1977; Straus, 1976, 1979b; Richardson, 1979). In terms of the major
variations mentioned, there is little or no external social pressure; the events defined as
making up the conversion appear to be drawn out over a number of weeks or months -
a period we might characterize as "medium" in length. The convert-in-process is
affectively aroused, but the emotional level is far from ecstatic. The emotional tone of
the experience seems best characterized as one of "illumination." Furthermore, and
most importantly, a reasonably high level of belief occurs prior to actual participation
in the religion's ritual and organizational activities.
The intellectual or self-conversion motif is largely a new mode of entry into a
religious community or movement. Its incidence as a conversion mode is probably on
the increase due to the "privatized" (Luckman, 1967) nature of religion in Western
society, the smorgasboard assortment of religion's competing for members, and the
ever-increasing presence of disembodied modes of religious communication: books,
magazines, specialized newspapers, movies, television, video and audio cassettes, etc.
376
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:59:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CONVERSION MOTIFS
The so-called "electronic church" - the television-production-oriented Ch
Fundamentalist groups whose "congregations" are essentially television vie
a particularly good example of this current trend. It has become very easy for
privately to control their own decisions about religious beliefs, organizations,
ways of life quite apart from any physically embodied social contact, sup
inducement of an affect-laden sort. In such a situation people in search of
community, identity, salvation, etc. can calmly and privately elect to "go for
people in the late seventies often expressed their adoption of a new "trip."
2. Mystical Historically speaking, the best known conversion motif is proba
one we here label "mystical" - a term not entirely accurate but better t
alternatives such as "Damascus Road," "Pauline," "evangelical," and "born
The term mystical at least has the virtue of signalling the common feelin
converts that "the experiences cannot be expressed in logical and coherent term
that "clear characterications . . . miss its depth" (Jules-Rosette, 1975: 62
prototypical instance within the Christian tradition is, of course, the conversi
Paul in a dramatic incident on the Damascus Road in the 1st century A.D. In fa
Paul's conversion, as recorded in Acts 9 and elsewhere in the New Testament, h
sense functioned as the ideal of what conversion should be in the Western world.
It is of note that the earliest scholars of conversion - William James ( 1911),
Edwin Starbuck (1911) and E. T. Clark (1929) - focused heavily on mystical
conversion. The reason for this might have been its more widespread incidence in late
nineteenth and early twentieth century America. It seems to have attracted less
interest among converts and scholars (who simply follow converts) in the middle third
of the twentieth century save as a minor topic within psychoanalytical analysis. In
fact, our contemporary definitions of mystical conversion are provided by psycho-
analytically oriented scholars such as Carl Christensen, who describes it as:
an acute hallucinatory episode occuring within the framework of religious belief and characterized by
its subjective intensity, apparent suddenness of onset, brief duration, auditory and, sometimes,
visual hallucinations, and an observable change in the subsequent behavior of the convert
(Christensen, 1963: 207).
It is characterized, further, by seeming "not to be wrought by the subject but upon
him" (Coe, 1916: 152, quoted in Christensen, 1963). This "feeling of submission - of
giving up or giving to" is preceeded by "withdrawal from others with a sense of
estrangement and often in feelings of unreality" and the outcome is
a sense of sudden understanding accompanied by a feeling of elation and by an auditory and
sometimes visual hallucination.... There is a feeling of change within the self... associated with a
sense of presence (Christensen, 1963: 214).
In terms of our "major variations," there is little or no social pressure, the convert
is even likely alone at the time of the actual event. What the convert defines as the
most critical period of the conversion is quite brief - perhaps on the order of minutes
or hours - although a period of stress preceeding the critical event may stretch back
some days or weeks. Its very brevity functions, indeed, to heighten the meaning. As
stated by an anthropologist who was converted to an African Apostolic church: "In my
case the initial shift from one set of interpretations to another was dramatic, resulting
377
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:59:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
in a moment of shock in which even the physical terms of existence seem
(Jules-Rosette, 1975: 62-63). The level of emotional arousal is extrem
sometimes involving theophanic ecstasis, awe, love, or even fear. An
signals the onset - or active intensification - of belief which is then
participation in the ritual and organizational activities of the religion wi
conversion experience is associated.
3. Experimental As observers of social life we are prone to commit th
the uniformly profound. If someone makes a dramatic change of life ori
radical reorganization of identity, meaning, life," as Travisano puts it), w
feel that equally dramatic, deep, and strong forces must have brought it
eyes of analysts, one strong event must be "balanced," as it were, by some
event or events. Accounts of mystical conversion, for example, often dis
balancing of cause and effect in the reports of both convert and anal
crescendo of personal guilt which culminates in the mystical experience.
The imagery often seems, indeed, to fit the "first" and "second" level o
have mentioned - but not always, thus we have the fallacy of the unifor
Specifically, recent research is uncovering the surprising degree to whic
frequency with which - a transformation of religious identity, behavior
view can occur quite tentatively and slowly and yet be identified by the
process as happening in that manner. This motif has been scrutinized mo
Robert Balch and his associate David Taylor. Studying followers of t
group in which one gives up all possessions and becomes an itinerant
found a "pragmatic 'show me' attitude, ready to give the Process a t
holding judgment" for a considerable length of time after taking up the li
fully committed participant and making significant sacrifices (Balch & T
Attuned to similar themes proposed by Bromley and Shupe (1979) and
Balch concludes "the first step in conversion ... is learning to act li
.... Genuine conviction developes later ... after intense involvement"
142).
The research that has revealed this conversion motif has focused on "new age,"
metaphysical types of groups. However, experimental conversions do not appear to be
confined to them. Groups that might appear to be poles apart in their authoritarianism
and organizational structure, such as Jehovah's Witnesses and Scientology, typically
insist that the prospective convert take an experimental attitude toward - and
participate in - the group's ritual and organizational activities. This is quite clearly
brought out in James Beckford's analysis of Jehovah's Witnesses' "talk about
conversion." He outlines four characteristics of conversion which are central in
conversations among Witnesses concerning their conversions: 1) it is though
involve a "progression of mental states;" 2) it is considered to be "predominan
cognitive" in nature; 3) it is "framed as something they achieved;" and 4) it follow
policy immediately to involve the neophyte "in practical work alongside more mat
Witnesses" (Beckford, 1978: 253, 255, 257; see also Straus, 1979a: 9).
In terms of our list of major variations, experimental conversions involve relatively
low degrees of social pressure to participate since the recruit takes on a "try-it-out"
posture. The actual transformation of identity, behavior, and world view commonly
378
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:59:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CONVERSION MOTIFS
called conversion takes place over a relatively prolonged period - often months or even
years - and does not appear to be accompanied by high levels of emotional arousal in
most instances. The affective content of the experience appears to be that of curiosity
This motif of change is, of course, not unique to religious or other highly
ideologized contexts. In fact, it resembles the ubiquitous manner in which people learn
new social roles and are more ordinarily assimilated into groups. The social mechanism
of such socialization processes have long ago been identified by Howard Becker as
situational adjustment - commitment being the end result of increasing adaptatio
and the making of side-bets (Becker, 1964). The notion of situational adjustmen
provides for us a "picture of a person trying to meet the expectations he encounters i
immediate face-to-face situations," thus encouraging us to "look to the character of th
[micro and immediate] situation for the explanation of why people change as they do.
We ask what there is in the situation that requires the person to act in a certain way or
to hold certain beliefs" (Becker, 1964: 44). Once we assume that, for whatever reasons,
a person wants to continue in a given situation, subsequent behavior can then be
understood in terms of ordinary situational requirements.
It is in such terms that we can hope to shine new light on the consistent finding
that "intensive interaction" is a significant feature of many conversion experiences.
Indeed, one recent study of Nichiren Shoshu asserts that intensive interaction is "the
key to ... transformation" (Snow & Philips, 1980: 444). Reformulated, "intensive
interaction" is an abstract and rather gross way in which to talk about opportunities
for progressive situational adjustments and the consequent development of
committing side-bets in Becker's (1964) terms.
4. AffectionaL As alluded to at the outset, a continuing interplay of three levels of
reality occurs in the study of conversion. At the first level - that of "raw reality" -
the conversion process involves "actual," "out-there" occurrences or situations. That
level is, however, ambiguously and imperfectly available to us. The second level - that
of the convert's experience and interpretation - is structured by the first level and by
any particular paradigm found useful to the convert to interpret the former. The third
level - that of analytic interpretations - provides, in its own right, a screen through
which we attempt to perceive the social-psychological reality of the transformation.
However, we must keep in mind that the prominence of any particular conversion motif
is likely to vary over time and geography, partly as a function of shifting fashions at
the second level, but mostly as a consequence of more weighty factors such as the
prevalence and content of mass communications. And, of course, the third level
changes in order to keep up with the first two.
We reiterate these ideas because they are especially pertinent in understanding the
dominance of the "affectional conversion" motif over the last two decades in social
science theory and research. The identification of this motif dates back to John Lofland
and Rodney Stark's 1965 analysis of positive affective bonds in the conversion process.
The notion was widely adopted and rapidly documented during subsequent years (see,
for example, the literature reviewed in Gerlach & Hine, 1970, Ch. 4, Richardson, ed.,
1977; Hierich, 1977; Robbins, Anthony & Richardson, 1978; Snow & Philips, 1980). By
1980, the motif was formulated in such phrases as "interpersonal bonds are the
fundamental support for recruitment" (Stark & Bainbridge, 1980: 389) - a more formal
379
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:59:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
rewording of the original phrase that becoming "one" was "coming to a
opinions of one's friends" (Lofland & Stark, 1965: 871). Critical causal efficacy
here aside, the motif thesis is that personal attachments or strong liking for p
believers is central to the conversion process. Such sentiment has the same d
importance or central significance in the process of affectional conver
intellectual illumination, mystical encounter, or experimental immersion
motifs already described.
We would like to believe that the fashionableness of the affectional motif in social
science in recent years has been more than mere intellectual fadishness. Rather, during
that period, investigators were uncovering - however fitfully and imperfectly - a new
central meaning in conversion - one that was both there in "raw reality" (our first
level) and to a reasonable extent in the convert's own perceptions and accounts (the
second level).
As a motif, the cognitive element is deemphasized (in decided contrast to
intellectual conversion). Reflecting the reality constructionism of the sixties (which
was itself a reflection of a broader relativism of the time), there is stress on the strong
degree to which all systems of social knowledge and beliefs are sustained by an
underlying "sentimental order" (Shibutani, 1961; Berger & Luckman, 1967). Truth is a
function of what is defined as such in the individual's social and emotional milieu.
"Social pressure" is certainly present but exists and functions more as "support" and
attraction than as "inducement" to convert. Analysts are somewhat vague on the
point, but one gets the impression that the process is relatively prolonged - a matter
of at least several weeks. Even if the central experience is affection, the ordinary level
of emotional arousal seems more in the range of "medium" intensity rather than the
more extreme states we find in the revivalist or mystical motifs. As in experimental
conversions, belief arises out of participation.
5. Revivalist. In several studies since World War II, the phenomenon of revivalist
conversion has been debunked by the finding that the most famous of revivalist
preachers and their organizations appear merely to simulate or stage quite mild
conversions rather than bring about the kind of dramatic occurrences asserted to have
been common in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (e.g., Lang & Lang, 1960;
Altheide & Johnson, 1977). We have thus become cynical about the existence of true
revivalist conversions, and the abundant literature documenting their occurrence in
earlier centuries has been ignored or at least neglected. However, that neglect is
combined with the probability of an actual decline in the incidence of revivalist
conversions in modern societies - or at least a decline in the incidence of their more
extreme versions, representing a decline of experiential acuteness at what we have
called the "first level of reality."
It is particulary incumbent on those of us who work at "level three reality" to
"keep alive" in human consciousness the broad spectrum of possibilities in all areas of
social life, including that of conversion. Even though it appears to be in decline in
contemporary industrialized societies, conversion whose central feature consists of
profound experiences which occur within the context of an emotionally aroused crowd
is far from absent in most societies throughout the world. Probably owing to a
rationalist tendency to retreat from emotionalism, however, scholars of crowd behavior
380
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:59:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CONVERSION MOTIFS
- or collective behavior - have generally lost sight of the very real fact that crow
can be brought to ecstatic arousals having a critically transforming effect on
people. The "social pressure" and "contagion" - albeit brief - can produce fear,
and joy of such intensity that individuals may obediently go through the outwar
inward methodology of a fundamentalist or evangelical conversion (Lofland, in p
There are, however, apparent revivalist "waves" of recurrence in spite of the
term decline of this conversion motif in Western societies (McLoughlin, 1978). So
people have even argued that we witnessed a relatively mild wave of reviv
conversions during the early seventies concommitant with the coming of th
religions." Indeed, the Unification Church appears to have resurrected the revival
experience in highly effective modern garb. Prospective converts recruited literall
the streets are taken on weekend retreats which involve a whirlwind round of si
chanting, hand-holding, preaching, and diffuse, loving comaraderie. In th
terminology of its closest participant observer, David Taylor, the effect is
"enthralling" for many. There is a marked "transition from a relatively mundane world
to a dynamic environment of ecstatic youth" (Taylor, 1978: 107):
Events and activities have an exciting quality. Participants experience emotional heights without
suffering subsequent letdowns. The exceptional nature of collective joy lies in... members' ability to
create events [that] have natural endings, yet the stimulation produced is seemingly inexhaustible.
There is the promise of more - the next event, the next day, the coming week.
All aspects of the training session blend together with exhilarating momentum. [The members']
enthusiasm requires prospects to invest their entire beings in the participatory events. Jumping up
to sing tumultuous songs; running from place to place hand in hand with a buddy; and cheering,
chanting, and clapping in unison with dozens of others inevitably makes a deep impresion on
prospective members.
Event the most reticent... find it difficult to resist being swept into this performance of continual
consensus. One may remain intellectually unsympathetic to [the members'] ... beliefs and goals, but
he [or she] will be in some way moved by the intense revelry. Possibly no participant escapes feeling
intense excitement, even if he regards the performance as inauthentic (Taylor, 1978: 153-154).
6. Coercive. We come, finally to a conversion motif that takes place only in
extremely rare and special circumstances but which has been alleged by some to be
rampant among the new religions of the Western world. Our reference is to what has
been labeled, variously, "brainwashing," "programming," "mind control," "coercive
persuasion," "thought reform," and "menticide," among other names.
The accusations surrounding this topic make it especially important to form a very
clear conception of the "nature of the beast" under discussion - a step that seems
noticeably neglected in the leading literature (e.g., Delgado, 1977). Toward that
clarification, we draw on what we believe to be the best single and most accurate
summary of "brainwashing." It appears under that title in the International
Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (1968) and was written by Albert Somit. An
extremely cogent treatment remaining inexplicably unattended, Somit's vision may
have been clear because he wrote after the fifties fears of communist brainwashing and
before the seventies fears of "cult mind control."
The two key features of brainwashing - or as we prefer, coercive persuasion
(Schein, 1961) - are (1) the compulsion of an individual (2) sincerely to confess guilt or
381
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:59:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
embrace an ideological system. The process of brainwashing individuals was
independently invented in the early twentieth century by European communists
extracting simple confessions of guilt and by Chinese communists striving for
systematic ideological conformity.
While practices differed somewhat in Europe and China, Somit delineates seven
"measures" which characterize both traditions: (1) total control of the prisoner's round
of life "down to the most intimate needs;" (2) uncertainty of the charges against one
and one's entire future; (3) isolation from the outside world; (4) torture in the form of
"mental and physical torment;" (5) physical debilitation and exhaustion achieved by a
"diet... planned to ensure rapid loss of weight, strength, and stamina" and induced by
the "constant interrogation, tension, and terror" associated with the other measures;
(6) personal humiliation association with denial of "any previous claim to personal
dignity or status;" and, (7) certainty of the captive's guilt - "the unyielding
assumption that he will confess and change" - which, when displayed by the captors,
"justifies even in the prisoner's mind the stringency of the measures applied ..." (All
quoted phrases from Somit, 1968: 139-140). Although these are the fundamental, social
interactional aspects of brainwashing, the process is not entirely negative. As the
subject begins to capitulate - or to "see the light" - "living conditions improve ...
[and] even ... interrogators become more friendly and less impersonal" (Somit, 1968:
140).
As a strategy, however, coercive conversion has two serious problems which limit
its usefulness even by ideologues who hold state power. First, if allowed to return to a
more or less open society, subjects "back slide;" "the results achieved are not
permanent" (Somit, 1968: 142). Something very similar to this may well have happened
to Patricia Hearst who, after being converted to the radical Marxist doctrine of the
Symbionese Liberation Army, appeared to return to her earlier socio-political beliefs
relatively easily and quickly once she was removed from the influence and control of
her abductors. Second, an inordinant amount of personnel, space, time, and other
resources are required to achieve sincere ideological change. At best, a relatively large
staff must be marshalled to "process" a single person or, at most, a small group.
Compared to other motifs, this is likely the "most expensive and uneconomical" of
possibilities (Somit, 1968: 142).
We appreciate it is currently common to summarize chapter Twenty-two, titled
"Ideological Totalism", of Robert Lifton's Thought Reform and the Psychology of
Totalism (1961) in characterizing "brainwashing." The eight "psychological themes"
he so skillfully evokes have become, indeed, a kind of litany on the topic. We also think
it is a litany that is off the mark even though it is also likely accurate as a
characterization of certain abstract features of certain ideologies. Indeed, by definition,
ideological totalism is constructed of the eight items he enumerates: milieu control,
mystical manipulation, the demand for purity, a cult of confession, a sacred science,
loading the language, doctrine over person, and dispensing of existence. Such features
are surely found in brainwashing settings but not confined to or definitive of them.
Instead, we must go on to add the kinds of considerations Ablert Somit makes so
explicit (above) but which are muted in Lifton's treatment. And, we must appreciate
how we can find totalistic settings (in the sense they display Lifton's eight features)
382
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:59:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CONVERSION MOTIFS
which are not brainwashing settings (in the sense they do not have Somit's
features), as for example the Bruderhof as reported by Zablocki (1971).
The possibility of social-psychological coercion cannot, nevertheless, be ign
interactional affective pressures and fears resulting from theological precepts co
conceivably function as coercively on some individuals as actual physical rest
and threats. For example, some evidence of such pressures is apparent in Ta
(1978: 153-4) description of revivalism quoted in our discussion of revivalist conv
Future treatments will have to deal with the crossovers between revivalist and coercive
conversion as well as the question of what "legitimately" constitutes coercion.
Summarized in terms of our five major variations, coercive conversion entails an
extremely high degree of external pressure over a relatively long period of time, during
which there is intense arousal of fear and uncertainty, culminating in empathetic
identification and even love. Belief, of course, follows participation.
Implications. We want to conclude by pointing out two classes of implications of
this kind of endeavor. The first concerns the social psychology of conversion per se. (1)
Differentiating "motifs," "careers," or "styles" should allow us to sharpen our
understanding of the phenomenon of conversion. Irrespective of the merits of the
present formulation, we feel that efforts of this kind are very much in order, and we
urge others interested in the subject matter to join us in improving on schemes of
conversion types. (2) The present effort is, of course quite narrow in the specific sense
that it adduces types but does not go on to delineate steps, phases, or processes within
each type. In future refined schemes rendering this one obsolete, we hope this
specification of process will receive prominent attention.
A second class of implications is socio-historical and organizational. (1) As
previously mentioned, we suspect conversion motifs differ significantly from one
historical epoch to another, across societal boundaries, and even across subcultures
within a single society. There are probably trends and subtrends in the prevalence of
particular conversion motifs and in the social conditions with which such trends are
correlated. Among other possibilities, we have suggested that in the media-drenched
("advanced") societies, intellectual and experimental conversion are on the increase,
and revivalist in relative decline. A wide variety of other conjunctions of social
circumstances and conversion motifs are likely discernable. (2) Certain religious
ideologies and organizations may have an affinity with some, rather than other,
conversion motifs. The classification of religious systems is itself a complex and
contention-ridden task. Nevertheless, one recurrent dimension of difference appears to
be the degree to which a religion absorbs and reorders an adherent's round of life. We
might expect, for example, those religious systems least affecting an individual's life to
be characterized by conversions least arousing (e.g., intellectual and experimental
conversions), while those most affecting an individual's life to be characterized by the
more dramatic (e.g., revivalist conversions). The picture is obviously far from simple,
partly due to the fact the converts to any single religion do not all experience the same
kind of conversion, and the dominant motif of any one religion (if there is one)
sometimes changes over time (e.g., the Unification Church's moving from affectional to
revivalist conversions, as reported by Bromley & Shupe, 1979).
In any event, the topic of religious conversion is among the most active,
383
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:59:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
challenging, and exciting in social science at the present time, and we invite
try their hand at increasing our understanding of this complex and evolving
materials.
REFERENCES
Altheide, David and John Johnson
1977 "Counting souls." Pacific Sociological
Review 20: 323-348.
Balch, Robert
1979 "Two models of conversion and
commitment in a UFO cult." Paper
presented at the Annual Meeting of the
Pacific Sociological Association.
1980 "Looking behind the scenes in a religious
cult: Implications for the study of
conversion." Sociological Analysis 41:
137-143.
Balch, Robert W. and David Taylor
1977 "On getting in tune: The process of making
supernatural contact." Unpublished paper,
the University of Montana.
Becker, Howard S.
1964 "Personal change in adult life."
Sociometry 27: 40-53.
Beckford, James A.
1978 "Accounting for conversion." British
Journal of Sociology 29: 249-262.
Bromley, David G. and Anson D. Shupe
1979 'Moonies' in America: Cult, Church and
Crusade. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications.
Christensen, Carl W.
1963 "Religious conversion." Archives of
General Psychiatry 9: 207-216.
Clark, Elmer
1929 The Psychology of Religious Awakening.
New York: Macmillan.
Coe, G. A.
1916 The Psychology of Religion. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Delgado, Richard
1977 "Religious totalism: Gentle and ungentle
persuasion under the first amendment."
Southern California Law Review 51: 1-110.
Gerlach, Luther and Virginia Hine
1970 People, Power, Change: Movements of
Social Transformation. Indianapolis:
Bobbs-Merrill.
Heirich, Max
1977 "Change of heart: A test of some widely
held theories about religious conversion."
American Sociological Review 83: 653-680.
James, William
1902 The Varieties of Religious Experience.
Garden City, New York: Doubleday,
Dolphin.
Jules-Rosette, Bennetta
1975 African Apostles: Ritual and Conversion in
the Church of John Maranke. Ithaca, New
York: Cornell University Press.
Lang, Kurt and Gladys Lang
1960 "Decisions for Christ." Pp. 415-427 in
M. R. Stein, A. Vidich and D. White (eds.),
Identity and Anxiety. Glencoe, Illinois:
Free Press.
Lifton, Robert Jay
1961 Thought Reform and Psychology of
Totalism. New York: Norton.
Lofland, John
1977 "Becoming a world-saver revisited."
American Behavioral Scientist 20:
805-818.
in "Crowd joys." Urban Life.
press
Lofland, John and Rodney Stark
1965 "Becoming a world-saver." American
Sociological Review 30: 862-874.
Luckmann, Thomas
1967 The Invisible Religion. The Problem of
Religion in Modern Society. New York:
Macmillan.
McLoughlin, William G.
1978 Revivals, Awakenings, and Reform.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rambo, Lewis R.
1979 "Current research on religious
conversion." Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the American Academy
of Religion.
Richardson, James T.
1978 Conversion Careers. (ed.) Beverly Hills:
Sage.
1979 "A new paradigm for conversion
research." Paper presented at the Annual
Meeting of the International Society for
Political Psychology.
Robbins, Thomas, Dick Anthony and James
Richardson
1978 "Theory and research on today's new
religions." Sociological Analysis 39:
39-122.
Schein, E. H.
1961 Coercive Persuasion. New York: Norton.
Shibutani, Tomatsu
1961 Society and Personality. Englewood Cliffs,
New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Snow, David A. and Cynthia Phillips
1980 "The Lofland-Stark model: A critical
reassessment." Social Problems 27:
430-447.
Somit, Albert
1968 "Brainwashing." Pp. 138-143 in volume 2
384
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:59:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CONVERSION MOTIFS
of David Sills (ed.) International
Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences. New
York: Macmillan.
Starbuck, Edwin
1911 The Psychology of Religion. New York:
Scribners.
Stark, Rodney and William Bainbridge
1980 "Networks of faith: Interpersonal bonds
and recruitment to cults and sects."
American Journal of Sociology 85:
1376-1395.
Straus, Roger
1976 "Changing oneself: Seekers and the
creative transformation of experience."
Pp. 252-272 in J. Lofland, Doing Social
Life. New York: Wiley.
1979a "Inside Scientology." Paper presented at
the Annual Meeting of the Pacific
Sociological Association.
1979b "Religious conversion as a personal and
collective accomplishment." Sociological
Analysis 40: 158-165.
Taylor, David
1978 The Social Organization of Recruitment in
the Unification Church. Master of Arts
thesis in Sociology, University of
Montana.
Travisano, Richard
1970 "Alternation and conversion as
qualitatively different transformatio
Pp. 594-606 in G. P. Stone and H.
Farberman (eds.), Social Psychology
Through Symbolic Interaction. Waltham,
Mass.: Ginn-Blaisdell.
Zablocki, Benjamin
1971 The Joyful Community. Baltimore:
Pelican.
SSSR MONOGRAPH SERIES
Volume Number 1 Richard K. Fenn's
TOWARD A THEORY OF SECULARIZATION
Focusing upon conflicts over the scope and location of the sacred in
modern societies, this work presents a multi-phase model for the analysis of
secularization process. Out of print.
Volume Number 2 William H. Swatos, Jr.'s
INTO DENOMINATIONALISM:
THE ANGLICAN METAMORPHOSIS
Proposing a new typology of churches, sects and denomination, this work
provides a socio-historical analysis of the development of Anglicanism in
the U.S. and England.
Volume Number 3 Gall Gehrig's
AMERICAN CIVIL RELIGION: AN ASSESSMENT
Through a comparative analysis of divergent theories and research, this
volume assesses the value of the civil religion concept for the social scien-
tific theory of religion.
Available from:
SSSR Business Office Vol. No. 2 $5.50 postage paid
Box U-68A
University of Connecticut Vol. No. 3 $5.50 postage paid
Storrs, Ct. 06268
385
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:59:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms