Oxford Handbook Topics in Psychology
Oxford Handbooks Editorial Board
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199935291.001.0001
Published: 03 March 2014 Online ISBN: 9780199935291 Print ISBN: 9780199935291
Search in this book
CHAPTER
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199935291.013.22
Published: 12 November 2015
Abstract
Keywords: situations, situational taxonomy, situational structure, situation perception, situational
characteristics, situational classes, situationism, interactionism
Subject: Research Methods in Psychology, Psychology
Series: Oxford Library of Psychology
Collection: Oxford Handbooks Online
Taxonomy of Situations and Their Measurement
Rustin D. Meyer
Numerous psychologists across several subdisciplines have argued that the eld’s ability to understand
and predict human behavior is limited by a lack of a universal way of conceptualizing and categorizing
situations. Perhaps the primary reason underlying this lack of consensus is the sheer enormity and
complexity of creating a taxonomy of an entity as amorphous and multifaceted as “the situation.” Despite
(or perhaps because of) the depth of this challenge, a number of researchers have put forth diverse
attempts to create taxonomies of situations. The present effort examines the critical choices that these
researchers have faced along the way and reviews specic examples of the various decisions they
ultimately made in developing their nal product.
Ultimately, a taxonomy of situations, if we ever have one, will surely not be the work of any one investigator
(Frederiksen, 1972; p. 117).
Numerous psychologists across several subdisciplines have argued that the ability to understand and predict
human behavior is limited by a lack of a universal way to conceptualize and categorize situations. Perhaps the
primary reason underlying this lack of consensus is the sheer enormity and complexity of creating a
taxonomizing of an entity as amorphous and multifaceted as “the situation.” Assuming that the perspective
captured by the introductory quotation from Frederiksen (1972) is correct, it stands to reason that researchers
who have attempted to create taxonomies of situations have made a number of critical and informative
decisions when considering such an undertaking.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
In an effort to pull together relevant considerations, the present article is structured around the following
critical questions: (1) is the taxonomy of situations a scientically important endeavor; (2) should taxonomists
focus on objective or subjective components of situations; (3) would psychology be better off endorsing a
universal taxonomy of all possible situations or creating multiple taxonomies of situations within specic
domains; (4) is it more prudent to categorize types of situations, the underlying dimensions that dene them,
or individual situational cues; and (5) are there best ways to obtain/create situational stimuli and analyze
resultant data, or are ad hoc approaches that draw from diverse methods inevitable? For each of these decision
points, existing taxonomies that have selected one option or another are described in order to highlight the
great diversity that exists across extant taxonomic efforts, although no claims are made to the
comprehensiveness of the present coverage.
Before getting into the focal content of the present article, however, it is important rst to take a step back and
consider not only the enormity of the tasks associated with situational taxonomy but also the length of time
that this question has vexed the eld of psychology. Both of these issues are captured in the following
quotations, which demonstrate that some of the brightest minds in psychology have lamented the lack of a
situational taxonomy for at least a half-century.
The most obvious need in evaluating the manifold encounter of organism and environment is a more
satisfactory and systematic conceptualization of the environment. This implies a taxonomic, dimensional
analysis of stimulus variables comparable to the trait systems that have been developed for individual
difference variables. While work proceeds actively to extend the exploration of individual differences … the
equally important frontier of situational dimensions is virtually ignored
( Sells, 1963 , p. 700).
… [W]hile methods of assessing dimensions of individual differences across persons abound, equivalently-
sophisticated, parallel methods for assessing behaviors or situations are painfully lacking … no larger scheme
organizes the many aspects of situations that have been demonstrated to be important
( Funder, 2009 , p. 123).
One of the primary consequences of this lack of consensus is that researchers who are interested in studying
the effects of situations are often forced to use ad hoc conceptualizations (Grote & James, 1989). Although this
practice has yielded much important information, creating a generalizable knowledge base upon ad hoc
conceptualizations may be viewed as a less-than-ideal scientic strategy. One might ask, however, “what
benets might come out of developing a universal taxonomy of situations?” The following section addresses
this question directly.
Why Is the Taxonomy of Situations an Important Scientific Endeavor?
From a basic science perspective, the notion that “the situation” exists as a psycho-socio construct is enough to
justify investing the time, effort, money, and other resources to study its nature and structure. That being said,
it is also important to point out that the case for its importance is bolstered by claims that it plays an important
role in the human experience (Sells, 1963). Here, evidence in support of the practical importance of situations
comes from a number of disciplines that have posited (and often found) important direct or indirect effects of
situations on human affect, behavior, and/or cognition.
For example, environmental psychologists study the effects of physical environments on the human
experience and have found signicant effects for communities, organizations, and even buildings on outcomes
as diverse as stress, attitudes, and replenishment of psychological resources (see Sundstrom, Bell, Busby, &Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Asmus, 1996 for a review). Further, the notion that situations and/or their dening elements play a central role
in human behavior is arguably social psychology’s raison d’être (Baumeister & Tice, 1985; Edwards &
Templeton, 2005). Lastly, some investigators have even postulated that the ability to discern relevant and
insightful information from situations is a characteristic that has been shaped through evolutionary forces and
is therefore expressed naturally by the human species (Kelley, Holmes, Kerr, Reis, Rusbult, & Van Lange, 2003).
These diverse lines of reasoning suggest that “situations” are important concepts, but they do not provide an
answer as to why a taxonomy of situations is important. Here, evidence supporting the taxonomy of situations
is contingent not only on nding effects but also on understanding those effects in a way that is both
parsimonious and practical—that is, on discerning the nature and structure of this broad category of
interrelated entities so as to uncover general scientic laws that help explain how and why various situations
affect different types of people in predictably unique ways (Hattrup & Jackson, 1996). Said differently,
classication is fundamental to the goals of science in that it provides a universal means of effectively
conceptualizing and efciently communicating information about concepts of interest (Rosch, 1978; Sokal,
1974). When developed with foresight and purpose, then, classication efforts have the potential to be more
than mere “catalogues of convenience” (Pervin, 1978, p. 98), by serving as meaningful theories in their own
right. Such a standard, however, requires that the constructs of interest be clearly articulated, that the
relationships among these constructs be specied, and that the system as a whole can be empirically falsied
(Doty & Glick, 1994).
Thus, it is in service of the scientic goals of description, prediction, and explanation that situational taxonomy
becomes critical. That is to say, it is not enough to show that a given situation has a particular effect on a
specic outcome; it is also necessary to be able to build a case showing why the situation has this effect. Said
differently, psychology should strive to answer the question “what active ingredients of the situation interacted
with specic individual differences to inuence a given outcome and what other situations share those same
ingredients and therefore might predict similar outcomes?” Perhaps, then, the best evidence for the need of a
taxonomy of situations comes from the long list of scholars across psychological subdisciplines who have
called for such a taxonomy (a lengthy list of quotations from diverse scholars can be obtained by contacting the
author). I argue here that these arguments typically take one of four forms.
First, the classic situationist argument (most common in elds such as sociology and social psychology) posits
that situations have important main effects on numerous outcomes of interest; thus, situational variables
should be thoroughly organized to better facilitate a full understanding of these inuences (Davis-Blake &
Pfeffer, 1989; Frederiksen, 1972; Rutter, Pickles, Murray, & Eaves, 2001). Second, the situation-as-context
argument (most common in elds such as educational psychology and the organizational sciences) posits that
broad environmental forces often inuence the expression of one’s personality, but this frequently occurs
through means that are unforeseen and/or that operate outside of the theory of interest (Cappelli & Sherer,
1991; Johns, 2001, 2006). Third, the interactionist perspective posits that human behavior is a joint function of
individuals and situations; thus, theories that attempt to explain human behavior should explicitly and
intentionally account for both of these sources of variability by demonstrating the main effects of each, as well
as their interactions (Barrick & Mount, 2005; Cronbach, 1957; Hattrup & Jackson, 1996; Magnusson, 1981;
Murtha, Kanfer, & Ackerman, 1996; Tett & Burnett, 2003). Fourth, the trait-based view of situations (primarily
found in personality psychology) posits that “only those situation taxonomies that are built as a further
specication of trait knowledge are of interest” (Ten Berge & De Raad, 1999, p. 354).
It is important to note here that the aforementioned perspectives are not necessarily at odds with one another;
they merely represent different approaches to conceptualizing ways in which situations affect outcomes in the
social sciences and would each be furthered by continued efforts to develop a universally accepted taxonomy of
situations. Before such a taxonomy will ever be possible, however, several key questions regarding the nature of
situations and their classication need to be addressed and, ideally, settled. As such, the following section
outlines the many decisions researchers must make when attempting to develop such a system, presented hereDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Objective versus Subjective Situations
as a series of questions with at least two competing options. Wherever possible, existing taxonomies that
represent the option in question are reviewed and discussed.
Key Decision Points for Creating/Evaluating a Taxonomy of Situations
Perhaps the rst question researchers must answer is whether situations should be dened as clusters of
objective stimuli or if the focus should be placed on people’s subjective interpretations thereof (Frederikson,
1972). The importance of this decision was rst described by Murray (1938), who dened press as “a directional
tendency in an object or situation” and distinguished between alpha-press, dened as “the press that actually
exists, as far as scientic inquiry can dene it” and beta-press, dened as “the subject’s own interpretation of
the phenomena that he perceives” (p. 122). From Murray’s perspective, those aspects of the situation that are
considered “press” are those characteristics that can help or harm the person (everything else is considered
“inert”), and the process of determining whether something helps or harms is the process of “pressive
perception.” When pressive perception is particularly inaccurate (i.e., when there is a large gap between the
objective positivity or negativity of a situation and one’s subjective interpretation of it), it can be said that the
individual is experiencing a delusion.
Extending this distinction one step further, Block and Block (1981) argued that situational stimuli can best be
divided into three broad categories of perceptual concreteness. First, they argued that there are rarely seen,
“perceptually unltered and uninterpreted” (p. 86) aspects of situations that are absorbed naturally through the
senses, which they referred to as “the physico-biological situation.” They also agreed with Murray’s concept of
“alpha press,” while simultaneously recognizing that the extent to which situational stimuli will likely be
agreed upon by most individuals who experience the situation in question is an important consideration,
which they referred to as “the canonical situation.” Lastly, and much like Murray’s beta-press, they also
recognized that situational stimuli might also be uniquely perceived by each individual, and they called this
“the functional situation.”
After creating this trifurcated distinction, Block and Block went on to develop a taxonomy of canonical
situations of their own, which was based on the responses of 11-year-old children to 54 diverse situation-
relevant items. Briey, their model builds on the results of previous taxonomies to elucidate 11 dening
dimensions (pp. 99–100): structure (the extent to which “goals, tasks, and roles are well-dened”), convergence
(the extent to which there is “one correct or acceptable solution”), divergence (the extent to which there is “an
open-ended number of alternative solutions”), evaluation (the extent to which “the accuracy, desirability, or
appropriateness of behavior is explicitly or implicitly understood to be evaluated”), feedback (the extent to
which “information about the effectiveness, appropriateness, or desirability of one’s behavior is explicitly
provided by another”), constraints (the extent to which “the dened goal, problem solution, or social
interaction is constrained by the presence of a barrier”), impedance (the extent to which the situation requires
“a high degree of exertion”), malleability (the extent to which situations “permit locomotion and/or
restructuring”), galvanization (the extent to which the situation is “attractively arousing, stimulating, or has
incentive value”), familiarity (the extent to which situations are “known to and predictable by the ‘average
expectable person’”), and differentiation (the extent to which situations are “highly articulated, with a great
number of ‘discriminanda’ or ‘regions’”).
Block and Block’s taxonomy has a number of positive features (1981). First, as is the focus of this section, these
authors specically stated that they are interested only in canonical situations, with the assumption that
understanding the ways in which individuals are likely to agree on the nature of the situations they experience
is necessary to explain the ways in situations interact with relevant individual differences to predict humanDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Situations in General or Specific Domains Thereof
behavior. Second, the authors also acknowledged the importance of distinguishing types of situations versus
the dimensions that dene them (discussed in greater detail later), although their analyses focused almost
exclusively on the latter. Third, their dimensional structure explicitly and intentionally built on the
dimensional structures of previous authors. Unfortunately, however, one of the primary limitations of their
taxonomy is that it was based on children’s responses, so its comprehensiveness and generalizability to adults
remains unknown.
Not surprisingly, other attempts at situational taxonomy have categorized objective components of situations
instead of perceptions thereof. A recent and interesting effort in this regard stems from a yet-unpublished
manuscript by Pury et al. (2014), who based their taxonomy on “situational affordances,” which can be dened
as those aspects of situations that explicitly permit certain types of behaviors to be expressed (Gibson, 1977).
This effort explicitly focuses on objective aspects of situations, which Pury et al. argue are independent of
personality or individual perception and will therefore prevent perceptual biases that have affected previous
studies of situations.
Given that the denition of affordances lends itself directly to action, these authors culled verbs from an
English language dictionary, reduced them to a list of 100 that represent those that are likely common in daily
life, and asked participants to rate them in terms of similarity. Results suggest that seven dimensions underlie
situations: change (the extent to which the situation is dynamic or remains static), ownership (whether one’s
self has control and responsibility over the situation or someone else has control and responsibility over it),
valence (whether the situation encourages approach or avoidance), timing (whether the situation shows little
activity or ongoing activity), target (whether the situation is focused on a person or an object), privacy (whether
relevant information is kept private or made known to others), and consideration (whether one’s focus is on
him/herself or on others).
An equally important question that researchers must address when creating a taxonomy of situations pertains
to whether their goal is to attempt to classify all possible situations or if they will focus on some subcategory.
This distinction is critical because creating a taxonomy of situations does not necessarily imply that the result
will represent all possible situations, meaning that taxonomies of specic domains of the universe of possible
situations can be well-developed entities that have an important impact on specic areas of study. Thus it is
important to state explicitly that taxonomies of situations in general should not necessarily be viewed as an
inherently more desirable end-state than more focused taxonomies, but simply that the focus and importance
of any taxonomy should be made explicit.
Regarding those efforts that have focused on creating taxonomies of situations in general, one example comes
from the work of Edwards and Templeton (2005), who attempted to discern all possible attributes (i.e.,
“dimensions”) that underlie situations. The philosophy driving their efforts was that situations, much like
people, are perceived as having enduring characteristics that are recognizable by human raters (i.e., that
situations have “traits”). In an effort to identify the most parsimonious list of traits used to describe situations,
these authors used an unabridged dictionary to identify more than one thousand adjectives, which they argued
represent all terms in the English language that can be used to describe situations.
These authors then asked multiple samples of undergraduate students to (a) rate the extent to which a random
sample of these adjectives described or did not describe a situation they experienced the day prior, (b) rate a
situation they experienced on several predetermined dimensions, or (c) sort situations on the basis of
similarity. Based on a combination of factor analyses, multidimensional scaling, regression, and cluster
analysis, the authors ultimately concluded that situations contain three foci: valence (positivity versus
negativity), productivity (the extent to which a situation is focused on goal achievement), and ease ofDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
negotiation (the extent to which situational constraints are exible and negotiable). They also argue that the
characteristics they identied are not only comprehensive but also reect the idea that perceptions of
situations are ultimately driven by the extent to which they facilitate or hinder goal attainment.
An important caveat to those studies that attempt to assess situations in general, however, is that even they are
oftentimes conceptually limited by the nature of their situational sampling strategy and/or they include one or
more important distinctions regarding the purpose/generalizability of their taxonomy. For example, the
Edwards and Templeton (2005) taxonomy outlined in the previous paragraphs assumes that situational
characteristics will only be detectable to individuals to the extent that those characteristics affect some relevant
outcome (e.g., a party might be perceived as “boring” because the party elicits a negative emotional state in the
perceiver, a battle may be perceived as “destructive” because of damage inicted on surrounding buildings) and
only employed situations experienced by college students. As such, one could interpret these authors’
conclusions not as the dimensions underlying all possible situations but, instead, as the dimensions having
“underlying causal powers” (p. 707) that are familiar to college students in a Western, educated, industrialized,
rich, and democratic (i.e., WEIRD) cultural context (Henrich, Heine, & Norenzayan, 2010). Furthermore, Price’s
empirical work on situational taxonomies (e.g., Price, 1974; Price & Blasheld, 1975; Price & Bouffard, 1974) used
undergraduate students and members of a small town in the Midwestern United States, meaning that
potentially important categories of situations are likely missing from these analyses. Again, such restrictions
should not necessarily be viewed as limitations, but instead as important qualiers to the generalizability of
the proposed taxonomies and to the scope of subsequent inferences.
Given the nearly innite number and diversity of situations that one might experience and the somewhat
focused research interests of many psychologists, it is not surprising that the majority of existing taxonomies
focus on subcategories of situations or dimensions thereof. Perhaps not surprisingly, then, these efforts are
dened by their diversity, in that situational taxonomies range from those that focus on occupational
environments (e.g., Holland, 1959, 1997) to those that focus on situations relevant to elderly individuals (Scheidt
& Schaie, 1978). Scheidt and Schaie’s taxonomy is reviewed here because it represents an effort that, on the one
hand, is focused on such a specic question that one might assume is only relevant to certain research
questions, but that, on the other hand, provides useful insights that might help inform the efforts of anyone
who is interested in better understanding the effects of situations on human behavior.
These authors approached the question of whether to focus on a general or specic domain from a cognitive
developmental perspective, in that their goal was to identify ecologically valid ways in which the competencies
of elderly individuals interacted with situational characteristics in order to predict the effectiveness of
intellectual functioning. To accomplish that goal, the authors used more than 300 situational stimuli developed
on the basis of interviews and self-reported situations among their target population and applied a
combination of sorting techniques and tetrachoric correlations to conclude that three critical dimensions
explained the class of situations they were most interested in: ease/adequacy of coping, subjective ratings of
pleasure/aversion, and frequency of occurrence. They then tested (a) the extent to which these dimensions
interacted with one another and (b) whether relevant individual differences inuenced the extent to which
participants perceived themselves as able to manage the situations in question. Although the authors
specically stated that theirs was a rather small rst step toward their broader scientic goals, the dimensions
they identied represent an important contribution to the cumulative knowledge about those dimensions that
may best dene situations and, at a minimum, could be used to help inform future interpretations of
subsequent taxonomies.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Situational Cues, Characteristics, or Classes
Although several of the taxonomies described thus far have focused on determining the underlying
dimensional structure of situations, it is important to point out that others have focused on identiable types
of situations (also known as “nominal situations”), whereas others have focused on specic pieces that dene
the composition of the situation. Indeed, the specic terms that can be used to refer to these aspects of
situations are not consistent. That being said, an active group of situational researchers have recently argued
that the following terms should be adopted (Rauthmann, Sherman, & Funder, 2015): Cues should be used to
describe the physical or objective pieces (or “elements”) of compositional information that make up situations
(e.g., the presence of other people, the presence of formal authority conveyed to the actor[s] within the
situation), Characteristics should be used to dene the dimensions that describe/underlie situations (e.g.,
whether the situation is, on par, positively or negatively valenced), and classes should be used to describe the
broad categories that individual situations can be categorized into (e.g., social situations, work situations).
Given the soundness of this recommendation and the recognized need for consistent situational language, I
adopt their nomenclature throughout the remainder of this article.
Taxonomies that focus on classes have as their unit of analysis broad categories of situations, but they remain
agnostic to the myriad potential ways in which these situations may be similar to or different from one
another. The emphasis is merely on the notion that the situations show cross-category heterogeneity and a
reasonable amount of within-class homogeneity. In contrast, characteristic-based solutions have as their unit
of analysis the nite number of ingredients/dimensions that can be used to differentially dene diverse
situations. These dimensions are typically viewed as orthogonal continua and are generally discovered
empirically, although several extant efforts have drawn from previous solutions in an effort to connect
contemporary ndings with past research.
Importantly, efforts in both of these camps have produced useful results. For example, some of the most highly
cited taxonomies of situations (for example, those of Jones & James, 1979, and Karasek, 1979) focus solely on the
characteristics that underlie situations, whereas other highly cited taxonomies (for example, that of Amabile,
Conti, Coon, Lazenby, & Herron, 1996) focus on a specic situational class. Furthermore, neither approach is
inherently superior to the other, although several authors have made reasonably convincing arguments that
characteristic-based solutions are more conducive to achieving many modern social science goals (Block &
Block 1981; Edwards & Templeton, 2005; Frederiksen, 1972; Magnusson, 1971; Rauthmann, Sherman, and
Funder, 2015). Because several characteristic-based taxonomies were outlined previously in this article, no
additional dimensional solutions will be reviewed here.
As an example of a class-based solution, Baumeister and Tice (1985) argued that a reasonable way to identify all
possible categories of situations would be to examine the nature of the independent variables used in the
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. Their argument was that one of the primary goals of the eld of
social psychology is to understand the ways in which situations inuence human affect and behavior, and for
that reason, sampling randomly from the stimuli used in one of social psychology’s primary journals should
yield a nearly comprehensive list of those aspects of situations that have an impact on human affect, behavior,
and/or cognition.
The original effort by these authors to identify the stimuli used to develop this structure yielded 1,622 stimuli;
they then used an intuitive sorting strategy to arrange those stimuli into 51 classes. The 51 classes were then
further subdivided into ve classes, which Baumeister and Tice argued represent the basic structure of
situations. Briey, these classes are the stimulus environment (i.e., “its physical, spatial, and temporal structure,
as well as any social structure that is external to the individual” p. 152), characteristics of subject (i.e., aspects of
the participant him/herself, though the authors acknowledged that some users may wish to eliminate this
category), cognitive and affective dynamics (i.e., induced states experienced by the individual), relationship
background (i.e., “the actual or perceived genesis of the subject’s relation to the other person[s] in the situation”Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Determining the Fidelity of Stimuli
p. 159), and matrix of possibilities (i.e., “the range of alternatives available to the subject for behavioral response
and the potential consequences, outcomes, and implications of the various alternatives” p. 162). Unfortunately,
however, this nal structure (a) contains many non-situational characteristics and (b) did not yield an
instrument that could be used to analyze situations. As such, this taxonomy is of limited use and
generalizability.
Finally, it is important to point out that a few studies have attempted to simultaneously create a taxonomy of
both classes and characteristics or to focus on one en route to a deeper understanding of the other. For
example, Magnusson and Ekehammar (1973) argued that ve dimensions (positive, negative, passive, social,
and ambitious) and six or seven types (depending on the analytic strategy used) can be used to describe
situations in general. Although the purely empirical nature of this solution prevented the creation of a more
logically consistent structure (e.g., by combining positivity and negativity into a single bipolar dimension),
these authors should be commended for attempting to understand situational characteristics, as well as classes
thereof. Furthermore, although the Block and Block (1981) taxonomy outlined earlier focuses primarily on
characteristics of situations, these authors also briey demonstrated how these characteristics might be able to
be combined to form types of situations. For example, they argue that “tough situations” lack structure, offer
energetic impedance, are evaluative in nature, feel unfamiliar to the experiencer, are constraining, and are not
malleable.
Methodological and Statistical Issues
Once the questions pertaining to the nature of the desired taxonomy have been addressed, it becomes
necessary to determine which empirical procedures are to be used to develop that taxonomy. Here again, there
are no inherently correct approaches, but some options are more or less appropriate depending on the nature of
the desired taxonomy and its uses. The following subsections outline each of the major issues to be addressed
and the available options for each.
Any empirically veried taxonomy of situations will necessarily be based on assessments of relevant stimuli—
that is, the situations that participants assess to provide the data that the researcher will use to derive the
ultimate taxonomy. An important methodological question, however, focuses on determining how much
information will be conveyed in each stimulus. I argue here that stimuli come in two general forms:
“componential” and “holistic,” though much variability exists within and between these two general
categories. Specically, componential stimuli represent relatively context-free aspects of situations represented
by a single part of speech. Holistic stimuli, in contrast, are larger combinations of terms, and they typically
contain substantial contextual detail (e.g., about the who, what, when, where, why, and how of the situation—
Johns, 2006). The merits and demerits of these two approaches are discussed below.
When developing arguments for using a componential perspective, a given author typically posits that a
certain part of speech (e.g., verb, adjective) can be used to adequately describe the function of the situations
that the authors view as most critical. For example, Pury et al. argued that verbs are a useful focus of attention
because one of the primary functions that situations fulll is that of affordances, so understanding what people
do in situations permits fuller knowledge of the most important features of these situations. Again, no claim is
made here that the Pury et al. approach is correct (per se), it simply represents a well-articulated, theoretically
grounded rationale for the authors’ choice, which is an important rst step in this process.
Regardless of which part of speech is selected, authors who take a componential perspective typically use one
or, at a maximum, a combination of a few words as their stimuli. This approach, however, is limited by the factDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Creating a Stimulus Set
that situations are typically best described as multifaceted entities, meaning that they involve one or more
actors, an action, and some description of surrounding conditions. Single-term lexical approaches, however,
focus exclusively on a single part of speech. The net result of this limited focus is that information about who is
engaging in the action in question, as well as why, etc. is missing from the stimulus set, thereby potentially
limiting the representativeness of the taxonomy itself and, therefore, the inferences made on the basis of that
taxonomy.
Indeed, Johns (2006) made a convincing case for the idea that successfully conceptualizing organizational
context (which is related to the concept of situations, albeit substantially broader in scope) requires information
about who is involved, what is happening, when they are doing it, where it is occurring, why it is occurring, and
how it is being done. From this perspective, then, situational stimuli can be represented by full sentences (or
even brief vignettes) that contain information about each of these considerations. An example of a study in
which more holistic stimuli were used is a recent publication by Rauthmann et al. (2014). Their samples A
through G were developed by asking participants to write a brief description of a situation they encountered
during the previous day. That situation was subsequently used by the participants as their reference point
when they completed a situational Q-sort activity. The Rauthmann et al. study will be described in greater
detail later in this article.
Given the nearly innite number of situations that humans can potentially experience, it is not surprising that
studies in the extant literature have come up with several different methods of developing a subset of stimuli
for study. Each such subset, however, has important limitations, suggesting that a comprehensive taxonomy of
situations (if one ever exists) will likely have employed multiple stimulus creation methods, some of which may
not appear in the following discussion.
First (and consistent with efforts in personality psychology that ultimately resulted in the Five Factor model of
personality), some researchers have employed the Lexical Hypothesis, which posits that important concepts
will exist in common language. Here, several specic approaches, all of which are based in some degree on the
Lexical Hypothesis, have been employed. The most straightforward approach (and that which is most
consistent with the efforts resulting in the Big Five) is to cull from an unabridged dictionary single terms that
represent and/or describe situations. As outlined previously, Pury et al. employed the lexical approach to nd
situationally relevant verbs that were used as stimuli in subsequent analyses (2014). This approach was
consistent with these authors’ goals because they were focused on situational affordances, which inherently
enable actions, but their stimuli (and, therefore, their ultimate conclusions) may lack additional contextual
information.
An interesting and novel way in which researchers have capitalized on the general idea underlying the Lexical
Hypothesis is by using more context-rich linguistic manifestations of situational information. Perhaps the
most comprehensive example of such an approach was published by Yang, Read, and Miller (2006), who used
Chinese idioms as their stimulus set. These authors argued that Chinese idioms are an especially rich source of
situationally relevant information because of cultural tendencies that put a strong emphasis on context.
Furthermore, Chinese idioms are of a standardized (i.e., four-character) format and cover a large number of
situations due to their importance in Chinese language and culture. Lastly, these authors’ efforts suggest that
Chinese idioms are easily translated into English, without losing important information or meaning.
Given the many benets of Chinese idioms as potential situational stimuli, Yang et al., asked participants to
engage in a sorting activity in which they categorized lists of idioms as a function of perceived similarity. This
approach allowed the authors to create an N × N matrix wherein cell values reect the number of participants
who classied any two idioms into the same category. These matrices were then cluster analyzed (a processDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
described in greater detail below) to form a hierarchical, 17-cluster solution. At the broadest level of abstraction,
the authors argued that most of the situations in their sample could be described by the extent to which they
facilitate versus hinder goal achievement (or, conversely, whether the situation is generally viewed positively or
negatively). One way in which this study was limited by its stimulus source lies in the fact that idioms are
typically written to support a point and are not used to describe mundane situations. Thus, the fact that the
ultimate solution pointed toward goal attainment as a critical underlying factor may say more about the
purpose of idioms than about the actual structure of situations. It is therefore important to investigate other
ways of creating situational stimuli.
A second method for deriving situational stimuli involves participants keeping a daily diary for the express
purpose of documenting psychologically salient situations, situations of a particular type (e.g., situations that
enable creativity—Amabile, Conti, Coon, Lazenby, & Herron, 1996), and/or specic details about situations. One
of the best-known situational taxonomies that used this stimulus-generation approach is Battistich and
Thompson’s (1980) analysis of the college milieu. These authors asked 37 undergraduates to keep a written
record of the situations they experienced for a period of two days. Participants then reviewed their lists and
added to them any situations they had experienced frequently over the course of the previous year. The 30
most frequently mentioned situations (across participants) were then selected by the authors to be rated by an
independent sample of student raters. Regardless of the specic details of the approach employed, the
underlying goal is the same: namely, to obtain a stimulus set representing situations that people report having
actually experienced.
A fundamentally different approach is to develop situational stimuli by asking subject matter experts (SMEs;
usually PhD psychologists or psychology graduate students) to inductively develop lists of situations that
particular individuals (or people in general) might experience under various circumstances. This approach has
the potential to be incomplete because of limitations of the SMEs’ particular experiences and/or limitations of
the human imagination. Thus, although some studies have used this approach in the past (e.g., Mehrabian &
Russell, 1974), this method seems to have fallen out of favor.
Perhaps the most common way of developing a set of situational stimuli involves collecting participants’
descriptions of actual situations they have experienced. I refer to these as “post-hoc methods” because they
involve asking participants to provide retroactive self-reports. As mentioned previously, Rauthmann et al.
(2014) asked several samples of participants to describe the situations they experienced at various points in the
previous day (e.g., at 11:00 a.m., 7:00 p.m., 24 hours prior) whereas Sherman, Nave, and Funder (2013) allowed
participants to choose from four preselected times (i.e., 10:00 a.m., 2:00, 5:00, or 9:00 p.m.). Although this
approach is likely to yield rich descriptions of actual situations, its primary limitation is that the use of xed
time frames may limit the diversity of situations because certain settings/activities may be excluded. Thus, if
this approach is used, this limitation should be addressed by including a diverse array of times to select from
and/or asking participants to describe the situation they were experiencing up to 24 hours prior (for example)
or at some randomly selected time.
Lastly, what I call “combinative” methods are those that involve using several relevant terms to form stimuli.
For example, Meyer (2009) used a random sentence generator that combined several parts of speech into fairly
rich descriptions of work situations (e.g., “discussing problems with direct reports as part of a team-building
activity,” “socializing with a coworker outside my ofce”), which were subsequently compared in a pairwise
fashion on the basis of similarity. The main benet of combinative methods is that they yield rich stimuli that
are relatively consistent in terms of phrasing. The main drawbacks of such approaches, however, are that (a)
one still needs to determine a method for populating each of the elds, typically using one of the methods
outlined previously and (b) this system yields a large number of nonsensical stimuli that need to be removed
(requiring the intervention of human judgment) before the ultimate stimulus set is ready for use. That being
said, if these drawbacks can be overcome, combinative methods have the potential to yield useful, high-delity
stimuli.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Data Collection Methods
Data Analysis Methods
After a stimulus set has been developed it is next necessary to collect data pertaining to the nature of stimuli
provided. If there is an a priori reason to believe that the situations will best be dened by specic underlying
characteristics or fall into one of multiple specic classes, then participants would simply read each stimulus
and assess the extent to which a given dimension denes it or place it in the most relevant category. Most
taxonomies, however, are more exploratory than conrmatory, meaning that the researcher does not have a
strong reason to believe that a given stimulus set will be dened by a nite set of underlying characteristics or
will best be categorized into a nite set of classes. For this reason, researchers typically need to gather data in a
way that permits characteristic-based and/or class-based information to be gleaned from participant
responses.
Perhaps the most common way to obtain such data is through pairwise analyses (Bijmolt & Wedel, 1995). With
this approach, participants simply read two stimuli and assess the extent to which they are similar to or
different from each other (in doing so, they might use a 1 to 7 scale where 1 = very dissimilar and 7 = very
similar). The greatest limitation of this system is that the number of possible pairwise comparisons grows
quickly as the number of stimuli increases. Specically, the formula for calculating the number of possible
pairwise comparisons is N(N – 1)/2, which means that the number of comparisons for which a given
respondent is responsible begins to become unruly at around 25, which yields 300 possible comparisons. A
slight (albeit rarer) variation on this procedure is to employ “triadic comparisons.” With this approach,
participants are exposed to three stimuli and asked to form (a) the most similar pair and (b) the least similar
pair. As with pairwise comparisons, however, the burden placed on participants increases greatly as the
number of stimuli to be compared increases (Bijmolt & Wedel, 1995).
Another alternative that can be employed when one does not have a priori dimensional information is to ask
participants to sort stimuli into groups on the basis of their perceived similarity. Typically, this process is
completed by asking participants to form as many or as few categories as necessary to represent the stimulus
set in question. The end result is an N × N matrix in which the number in each cell represents the number of
participants who put two stimuli into the same category. Fortunately, several Web-based programs are
available for randomizing the presentation of stimuli and populating the N × N matrix based on participants’
responses.
The last step in creating a taxonomy of situations is to analyze the data collected using one of the
aforementioned options. Here, the most common approaches are multidimensional scaling (MDS), factor
analysis, and cluster analysis. Space limitations do not permit detailed discussions of each of these approaches
(and there are numerous books and hundreds of journal articles published on each), but there are a few key
issues that should be discussed here.
First, an inherent characteristic of data reduction analyses is that some explanatory power is lost in pursuit of
parsimony. Second, all of these approaches require a rather large amount of human interpretative judgment.
That is, once a particular structure is decided on, it is incumbent on the researcher to make sense of the specic
ways the original stimuli map onto that structure. Although this process is difcult, it is possible to validate the
ultimate structure post hoc. Specically, a new group of participants can rate the original stimulus on the
dimensions decided on by the researcher and a host of plausible alternatives. These ratings can then be
regressed onto the location of each stimulus on the ultimate MDS map. Conceptually similar methods are also
available for factor analyses and cluster analyses, wherein an independent sample of participants assesses the
extent to which the stimuli are either indicators of a given factor or “belong” in each of the resultant factorsDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
(respectively). Regardless of which approach is used, validation of the researcher’s original solution by an
independent group of raters is an essential step in the development of any taxonomic solution.
Shared Characteristics of Extant Situational Taxonomies
Given the numerous decisions researchers must make when developing taxonomies of situations (as well as the
shear magnitude of any such endeavor), it should not be surprising that a true consensus pertaining to the
nature and structure of situations remains elusive. Additionally, however, there is a host of more systemic
issues that have limited extant taxonomic efforts. I argue that, despite the diversity of approaches outlined
previously, nearly all attempts to create taxonomies of situations share two (potentially related) features.
First, they represent the work of a single researcher (or team of researchers) working in relative isolation, with
little attempt to build on existing efforts. This phenomenon is particularly unfortunate because many areas of
social science research posit main and/or interactive effects for situations. Thus it is somewhat puzzling that
more consensus does not exist around this question in psychology as a whole. This critique, however, comes
with a caveat; namely, that most researchers who have created taxonomies of situations have made a concerted
effort to draw from one or more extant efforts (e.g., in offering dimension names), but few if any have actively
built on or extended the work of others. Consistent with the Frederiksen (1972) epigraph at the beginning of this
article, this reluctance to work in concert with other researchers (from the past or the present) is unfortunate
given that it is highly unlikely that any single scholar will ever produce the denitive taxonomy of situations.
Second, no single taxonomy has been adopted across disciplines to any great degree; nor has any developer of a
taxonomy made an effort to “advertise” across multiple disciplines. Therefore there continue to be numerous
calls across a variety of literatures for a universally accepted taxonomy of situations. Many of the attempts to
classify this domain of constructs have been published in discipline-specic journals and have primarily cited
work in closely related areas. The end result of this isolation is that efforts from one area of study that are
potentially useful in other areas of study are not discovered and therefore are not used. This phenomenon also,
however, speaks to an unfortunate “Catch 22” in the publication of scholarly work in this area: namely, there is
no general psychology journal that regularly and consistently publishes work relevant to situational
taxonomies, and the science of situational taxonomy has no single natural home in any subdiscipline of
psychology.
It is important to highlight here, however, the collaborative research efforts of an international team of
psychologists who have devoted substantial effort to situational taxonomy. Specically, The International
Situations Project (headquartered at the University of California Riverside) represents a consortium of scholars
who have collected large amounts of data from across the world and have published several studies on the topic
of situational taxonomy.
Perhaps the most important contribution of this group is the creation of the Situational Eight DIAMONDS,
which posits that eight characteristics can be used to dene situations in general (Rauthmann et al., 2014).
Specically, “Duty” refers to the extent to which a task needs to be completed, “Intellect” refers to the extent to
which one’s intellectual capacity can/should be demonstrated, “Adversity” refers to the extent to which
threats/harm may occur, “Mating” refers to the extent to which sex is a salient characteristic, “pOsitivity”
refers to the extent to which good things may occur, “Negativity” refers to the extent to which bad things may
occur, “Deception” refers to the extent to which someone may be misled, and “Sociality” refers to the extent to
which personal interactions may occur.
Although the Situational Eight DIAMONDS is not a perfect solution to the problem of situational taxonomy
(e.g., some items load in unexpected ways on their nal factor structure, it deals only with situational
characteristics while being agnostic with respect to situational categories), it does represent an important leapDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Accounting for the Hierarchical Structure of Situations
Simultaneously Accounting for Both Characteristics and Categories
forward. Specically, just as the Big Five represents the best-known factor structure of personality in general,
the DIAMONDS model represents a comprehensive attempt to dene the characteristics that dene situations
in general. As such, it is likely that this model will have an important impact on the understanding of situations
and psychologists’ ability to make sense of this broad and important domain. Assuming for the moment,
however, that the DIAMONDS model will not be the last word in situational taxonomy, the following section
outlines several key areas of needed future research.
Future Directions
Some psychologists have recognized that categories of situations are naturally nested within each other and
that categories at each level can be dened by their standing on one or more underlying characteristics
(Saucier, Bel-Bahar, & Fernandez, 2007; Yang, Read, & Miller, 2006). At a very broad level of abstraction
(although, perhaps not, the broadest), researchers might nd that situations can be divided by settings into
work and recreational situations and that their standing on “duty” (for example) can be used to differentiate
these broad categories. Within each of these broad domains, then, more specic types of situations also surely
exist, which can themselves be classied and dened according to other relevant underlying characteristics.
For example, Meyer (2009) has argued that work situations can be subdivided into four classes: “bureaucratic
work situations,” “incubative work situations,” “prosaic work situations,” and “strategic work situations” which
are dened by their standing on two dimensions: “maintenance-development” and “formality-informality.”
Although several theorists have pointed out the importance of dening both classes and characteristics of
situations (e.g., Funder, 2006; Pervin, 1978), most of the material reviewed throughout the present article
suggests that extant attempts to classify situations have tended to focus on only one of these goals, to the
exclusion of the other (Eckes, 1995). This is unfortunate because a taxonomy that simultaneously conveys
information about both hierarchical classes of situations and their dening characteristics would permit a
large amount of denitional information to be conveyed via simple labels. For example, knowing that an
incubative situation is a work situation conveys the fact that it is high on the higher-order characteristic of
duty, as well as the lower-order characteristics identied by Meyer (2009)—namely, development orientation
(i.e., that the situation is focused on the future), and informality (i.e., that the situation lacks policies,
procedures, and rules about employee expectations). To the extent that subordinate classes of situations are
further elucidated (e.g., taxonomic efforts are focused on discovering subtypes of “incubative work situations”),
even more denitional information can be known by simply knowing where a given situation exists within the
hierarchical taxonomy.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
The last issue I will address is the rather piecemeal nature of the solutions outlined throughout this article.
That is, extant situational taxonomies have tended to develop in relative isolation from one another. This is not
to say that researchers developing situational taxonomies do not cite relevant prior efforts, but few (if any)
actively seek to build on existing situational taxonomies. Given the enormity of the task in front of us, I argue
that a sense of interconnected continuity will be necessary to achieve a reasonable consensus in this matter.
Furthermore, I implore psychologists to look to other sciences that have created meaningful and long-lasting
taxonomies of their concepts of interest. For example, The Linnaean Taxonomy of organisms in biology
efciently conveys large amounts of information about both characteristics (e.g., warm-blooded versus cold-
blooded animals) and categories (e.g., mammals versus reptiles). Similarly, the periodic table of elements in
chemistry arranges chemicals into categories via columns (e.g., alkali metals, noble gases) on the basis of the
conguration of the electrons in their shell, and the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-5) groups
psychiatric disorders on the basis of various diagnostic criteria.
Although none of these systems is without controversy, they all resulted from the cooperative efforts of
concerned members of the discipline thinking, planning, and acting in concert to provide a universal system
for the benet of their respective elds. Such an effort would, I believe, benet psychology as a whole by
providing not only a universal nomenclature but also the foundations of an updatable system to which
interested parties could contribute. Although individual taxonomic efforts reported to date have been
impressive and useful, I think psychologists should recognize Frederiksen’s (1972) wisdom when he stated that
a taxonomy of situations “will surely not be the work of any one investigator” (p. 117), and psychologists
should, therefore, begin the process of coming together to determine how our efforts might be used in concert
to develop a system that will be mutually advantageous, scientically rigorous, and able to withstand the test of
time.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
References
Amabile, T. M., Conti, R., Coon, H., Lazenby, J., & Herron, M. (1996). Assessing the work environment for creativity. The Academy
of Management Journal, 39, 1154–1184.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Barrick, M. R., & Mount M. K. (2005). Yes, personality matters: Moving on to more important matters. Human Performance, 18,
359–372.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Battistich, V. A., & Thompson, E. G. (1980). Studentsʼ perception of the college milieu: A multidimensional scaling analysis.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 6, 74–82.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Baumeister, R. F., & Tice, D. M. (1985). Toward a theory of situational structure. Environment and Behavior, 17, 147–192.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Bijmolt, T. H. A., & Wedel, M. (1995). The eects of alternative methods of collecting similarity data for multidimensional scaling.
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 12, 363–371.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Block, J., & Block, J. (1981). Studying situational dimensions: A grand perspective and some limited empiricism. In D. Magnusson
(Ed.), Toward a psychology of situations: An interactional perspective (pp. 85–106). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Cappelli, P., & Sherer, P. D. (1991). The missing role of context in OB: The need for a meso-level approach. Research in
Organizational Behavior, 13, 55–110.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Cronbach, L. J. (1957). The two disciplines of scientific psychology. American Psychologist, 12, 671–684.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Davis-Blake, A., & Pfeer, J. (1989). Just a mirage: The search for dispositional eects in organizational research. The Academy of
Management Review, 14, 385–400.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Doty, D. H., & Glick, W. H. (1994). Typologies as a unique form of theory building: Toward improved understanding and modeling.
The Academy of Management Review, 19, 230–251.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Eckes, T. (1995). Features of situations: A two-mode clustering study of situation prototypes. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 21, 366–374.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Edwards, J. A., & Templeton, A. (2005). The structure of perceived qualities of situations. European Journal of Social Psychology,
35, 705–723.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Frederiksen, N. (1972). Toward a taxonomy of situations. American Psychologist, 27, 114–123.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Funder, D. C. (2006). Towards a resolution of the personality triad: Persons, situations, and behaviors. Journal of Research in
Personality, 40, 21–34.
Google Scholar WorldCatDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Funder, D. C. (2009). Persons, behaviors, and situations: An agenda for personality psychology in the postwar era. Journal of
Research in Personality, 43, 120–126.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Gibson, J. J. (1977). The concept of aordances. In R. Shaw, J. Bransford (Eds), Perceiving, acting, and knowing: Toward an
ecological psychology. (pp. 67–82). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Grote, G. F., & James, L. R. (1989). The development of a typology of achievement situations for American college students.
Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs, 115, 315–328.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Hattrup, K., & Jackson, S. E. (1996). Learning about individual dierences by taking situations seriously. In K. R. Murphy (Ed.),
Individual dierences and behavior in organizations (pp. 507–547). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the world? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33, 1–75.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Holland, J. L. (1959). A theory of vocational choice. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 6, 35–45.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Holland, J. L. (1997). Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational personalities and work environments (4th ed.). Odessa, FL:
Psychological Assessment Resources.
Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Johns, G. (2001). In praise of context. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 22, 31–42.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Johns, G. (2006). The essential impact of context on organizational behavior. Academy of Management Review, 31, 386–408.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Jones, A. P., & James, L. R. (1979). Psychological climate: Dimensions and relationships of individual and aggregated work
environment perceptions. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 23, 201–250.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Karasek, R. A. (1979). Job demands, job decision latitude and mental strain: Implications for job redesign. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 24, 285–308.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Kelley, H. H., Holmes, J. G., Kerr, N. L., Reis, H. T., Rusbult, C. E., & Van Lange, P. A. M. (2003). An atlas of interpersonal situations.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Magnusson, D. (1971). An analysis of situational dimensions. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 32, 851–867.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Magnusson, D. (1981). Toward a Psychology of Situations: An Interactional Perspective, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Magnusson, D., & Ekehammar, B. (1973). An analysis of situational dimensions: A replication. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 8,
331–339.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Mehrabian, A., & Russell, J. A. (1974). An Approach to Environmental Psychology. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Meyer, R. D. (2009). Defining the nature and structure of work situations (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). West Lafayette, IN:
Purdue University. Retrieved from ProQuest. (3379672).
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in personality. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Murtha, T. C., Kanfer, R., & Ackerman, P. L. (1996). Toward an interactionist taxonomy of personality and situations: An integrative
situational-dispositional representation of personality traits. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 193–207.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Pervin, L. A. (1978). Definitions, measurements, and classifications of stimuli, situations, and environments. Human Ecology, 6,
71–105.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Price, R. H. (1974). The taxonomic classification of behaviors and situations and the problem of behavior-environment
congruence. Human Relations, 27, 567–585.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Price, B. H., & Blashfield, R. K. (1975). Explorations in the taxonomy of behavior settings: Analysis of dimensions and
classification of settings. American Journal of Community Psychology, 3, 335–351.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Price, R. H., & Bouard, D. L. (1974). Behavioral appropriateness and situational constraint as dimensions of social behavior.
Journal of Personality and Psychology, 30, 579–586.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Pury, C. L. S., Switzer, F. S., Brawley, A. M., Brown, B. A., Sinclair, R. R., Kowalski, R. M., … Britt, T. W. (2014). Situations as
aordances: A taxonomy of situational constraints based on English verbs. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Rauthmann, J. F., Gallardo-Pujol, D., Guillaume, E. M., Todd, E., Nave, C. S., Sherman, R. A., Ziegler, M., Jones, A. B., &
Funder, D. C. (2014). Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 107, 677–718.
Rauthmann, J. F., Sherman, R. A. & Funder, D. C. (2015). Principles of situation research: Towards a better understanding of
psychological situations. European Journal of Personality 29, 363–381.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of Categorization. In A. Collins & E. E. Smith (Eds.), Readings in cognitive science: A perspective from
psychology and artificial intelligence (pp. 312–322). San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Rutter, M., Pickles, A., Murray, R., Eaves, L. (2001). Testing hypotheses on specific environmental causal eects on behavior.
Psychological Bulletin, 127, 291–324.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Saucier, G., Bel-Bahar, T., & Fernandez, C. (2007). What modifies the expression of personality tendencies? Defining basic
domains of situation variables. Journal of Personality, 75, 479–504.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Scheidt, R. J., & Schaie, K. W. (1978). A taxonomy of situations for an elderly population: Generating situational criteria. Journal
of Gerontology, 33, 848–857.
Google Scholar WorldCatDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Sells, S. B. (1963). Stimulus determinants of behavior. New York, NY: Ronald.
Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Sherman, R. A., Nave, C. S., & Funder, D. C. (2013). Situational construal is related to personality and gender. Journal of Research
in Personality, 47, 1–14.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Sokal, R. R. (1974). Classification: Purposes, principles, progress, prospects. Science, 185(4157), 1115–1123.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Sundstrom, E. Bell, P. A., Busby, P. L., & Asmus, C. (1996). Environmental psychology: 1989–1994. Annual Review of Psychology,
47, 485–512.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Ten Berge, M. A., & De Raad, B. (1999). Taxonomies of situations from a trait psychological perspective: A review. European
Journal of Psychology, 13, 337–360.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Tett, R. P., & Burnett, D. D. (2003). A personality trait-based interactionist model of job performance. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 88, 500–517.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Yang, Y., Read, S. J., & Miller, L. C. (2006). A taxonomy of situations from Chinese idioms. Journal of Research in Personality, 40,
750–778.
Google Scholar WorldCatDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/42044/chapter/355794666 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025