A typology of social media rituals
Tommaso Trillo` *,† , Blake Hallinan †
, Limor Shifman
Department of Communication and Journalism, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israelaaa
*Corresponding author: Tommaso Trillo` , Postdoctoral Researcher, Department of Communication and Journalism, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Mount Scopus 91905, Jerusalem, Israel; email: tommaso.trillo@mail.huji.ac.il
†
Tommaso Trillo` and Blake Hallinan contributed equally to this study.
Abstract
Given its massive volume and rapid development of new trends, the universe of user-generated content may seem utterly chaotic. Yet the flow
of content is underlined by deep-rooted patterns of communication. In this article, we present the first systematic attempt to identify these pat-
terns using the concept of social media rituals. Understood as typified communicative practices that formalize and express shared values, rituals
offer a productive path to categorize popular genres of content and trace the values they convey. Integrating theoretical literature on rituals with
empirical studies of social media genres, we develop a typology of 16 rituals that express diverse values, ranging from respect and responsibility
to materialism and pleasure. Furthermore, we show that rituals embed different notions of good communication, as reflected in the values of
authenticity, persuasion, affiliation, and demonstration. Finally, we discuss how our framework can facilitate comparative investigations of user-
generated content and platform values.
Lay Summary
The world of user-generated content on social media is vast and seemingly unorganized. In this article, we attempt to identify some of its over-
arching patterns by sorting social media content into different “rituals,” patterned ways of communicating where people express and negotiate
shared values. We integrate theoretical literature on rituals with empirical studies of social media genres to develop a typology of 16 rituals. Each
ritual conveys different values, ranging from respect and responsibility to materialism and pleasure. Rituals also convey different notions of what
counts as good communication, emphasizing one of four communicative values: authenticity, persuasion, affiliation, or demonstration. In our
conclusion, we discuss how our framework can support future comparative research on what people post to social media.
Keywords: genres, rituals, social media rituals, user-generated content, values
From performing dance challenges to debating political issues to
wishing happy birthday to distant relatives, billions of people
across the world use social media to express what matters to
them. Each contribution amounts to “a tiny value assertion”
(Gillespie, 2018, p. 210), which is then subjected to a series of
tiny evaluations in the form of likes, shares, and comments.
While values and evaluation processes are central to digital cul-
ture, the construction of values by users has not yet been studied
systematically. This can largely be explained by the scale and de-
centralization of digital culture. Given its massive volume and
rapid development of new trends, the universe of user-generated
content may seem utterly chaotic. The transnational character of
social media further adds to the complexity, as culturally situ-
ated practices associated with the production of digital content
may not have the same visibility in different contexts. Yet, we
contend that deep-rooted patterns of communication—which
we refer to as social media rituals—cross contexts and underlie
this seemingly chaotic sphere.
Building on and expanding pioneering studies of social me-
dia rituals (Burgess et al., 2018; Gibbs et al., 2015), we define
such rituals as typified communicative practices on social me-
dia that formalize and express shared values. The concept
offers a productive way to categorize popular genres of user-
generated content and trace the values they convey. While
some studies have suggested using genres as keys for ordering
the chaotic universe of user-generated content (Hallinan,
Kim, Scharlach, et al., 2021), the number and ephemerality of
social media genres make comparative investigation difficult.
Even though the concepts of ritual (Grimes, 2013) and genre
(Yates & Orlikowski, 1992) both focus on patterned modes
of expression, rituals encompass a wider range of phenomena
and more explicitly foreground the expression of values (Bell,
1997; Goffman, 2005 [1967]), broadly understood as guiding
beliefs about what is desirable. Hence, we approach ritual as
a higher-level analytic that potentially encompasses many
specific genres.
In order for social media rituals to function effectively as a
framework for organizing and comparing social media gen-
res, we need a sense of what types of rituals are out there.
Unfortunately, existing research offers little guidance on this
front. While there have been studies of specific social media
rituals including celebrity deaths (Burgess et al., 2018), roasts
on Reddit (Dynel & Poppi, 2019), and the ritualized interac-
tions of families that live far apart (Abel et al., 2021), there
have been no systematic attempts to categorize or typify such
rituals. Furthermore, following a broader trend of social
media studies (Matassi & Boczkowski, 2021), most of the re-
search on social media rituals focuses on English-language
content, making it difficult to determine the cross-cultural rel-
evance of specific ritual practices. Embracing these challenges,
we set out to identify transnationally popular social media rit-
uals and examine the values that they convey.
Associate Editor: Lee Humphreys
Received: 10 January 2022. Revised: 14 April 2022. Accepted: 24 May 2022
VC The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of International Communication Association.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which
permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 2022, 00, zmac011
https://doi.org/10.1093/jcmc/zmac011
Full-length Research Article
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article/27/4/zmac011/6644420 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Our study of social media rituals unfolds in four parts.
First, we review the literature, discussing how rituals con-
struct shared values, media technologies shape the character-
istics of rituals, and genres of user-generated content act as
the building blocks of social media rituals. Second, we present
our methodology: a grounded analysis integrating literature
on rituals and research on genres of social media content,
complemented by a transnational participant observation of
social media platforms. Third, we introduce our typology of
16 social media rituals, each associated with a set of core and
communicative values. We argue that the typology balances
the flexibility necessary to accommodate most genres of user-
generated content with the boundedness necessary for a useful
analytical tool. Finally, we discuss how our framework can
facilitate future comparative investigations of user-generated
content and platform values.
Literature review
The ritualized construction of values
Despite the proliferation of attempts to define rituals over a
century of scholarly investigation, the concept remains some-
what elusive. As Grimes (2013) summarizes, rituals have “a set
of family resemblances” but lack a “singular, shared, definitive
quality” (appendix, p. 38). However, most approaches agree
that rituals are intentional and typified performances through
which “people embody assumptions about their place in a
larger order of things” (Bell, 1997, p. xi). Accordingly, rituals
are concerned with the relationship between people and the
values that govern their behavior. This association between val-
ues and rituals can be traced back to Durkheims (1995 [1915])
foundational work on the role of religious rituals in the produc-
tion of moral communities. Durkheim contends that religious
rituals not only venerate the divine but also reproduce a shared
vision of society. In other words, rituals mobilize people and in-
tegrate them into a community that shares a set of social
values.
The lens of ritual, however, need not exclusively apply to
highly formalized performances. As Goffman (2005 [1967])
demonstrated, the concept can also illuminate the social func-
tion of more mundane exchanges. According to Goffman, in-
terpersonal interactions are calculated performances in which
people aim to preserve their self-worth and recognize the
worth of others. In turn, these actions reaffirm societal princi-
ples of evaluation, namely, the values according to which so-
cial worth is assigned. From the above, we conclude that all
rituals, from the mundane to the sacred, selectively incorpo-
rate the norms and aspirations of particular social groups
(Bell, 1997; Grimes, 2013).
While there is a rich tradition of theorizing ritual, there has
been significantly less interest in categorizing different types
of rituals. Among existing typologies, some are broad and of-
fer novel ways to think about rituals rather than actionable
tools for empirical analysis. Examples include Humphrey and
Laidlaw’s (1994) twofold distinction between performance-
centered and liturgy-centered rituals and Whitehouse’s (2004)
distinction between doctrinal and imaginistic religious rituals.
Bell (1997) offers a somewhat more extensive typology, iden-
tifying six ritual genres (rites of passage; calendrical and com-
memorative rites; rites of exchange and communion; rites of
affliction; rites of feasting, fasting, and festivals; and political
rituals) based on a review of the terms employed by other
scholars in the field. To the best of our knowledge, the most
comprehensive attempt to classify ritual types has been car-
ried out by Grimes (2013). Developed during his tenure as ed-
itor of the Journal of Ritual Studies to classify incoming
articles, Grimes’ typology features 18 rituals distinguished
according to their main function. Given the lack of equivalent
typologies for social media rituals discussed below, this pro-
vides a useful starting point for parsing social media content.
The mediation of rituals: From mass to social media
Although rituals have conventionally been investigated in the
context of local communities, mass communication technolo-
gies have changed the scale at which rituals can take place.
Foundational work on the mediation of rituals focused on ex-
ceptional events, more closely aligned with Durkheim’s reli-
gious rituals than with Goffman’s interactional rituals. For
example, Dayan and Katz (1996) conceptualized media events
as exceptional moments that interrupt the flow of everyday
life, such as the televised funeral of U.S. President John F.
Kennedy. Building on this notion, Cottle (2006) defines medi-
atized rituals as “exceptional and performative media phe-
nomena that serve to sustain and/or mobilize collective
sentiments and solidarities based on symbolization and a sub-
junctive orientation to what should or ought to be” (p. 415).
Crucially, however, various scholars have noticed that me-
dia rituals are not limited to extraordinary events but also en-
compass everyday interactions with media. Whether
involving television (Couldry, 2003), computer-mediated
communication (Hillis, 2009), or social media platforms
(Humphreys, 2018), media rituals are interwoven in our daily
life. From public confessions on daytime talk shows to the
documentation of everyday life on a personal blog, mundane
patterns of mediated communication construct shared societal
notions of what is worthy of attention and, therefore, has
value.
While the boundary between the exceptional and everyday
in mediated rituals has never been tidy (see Couldry, 2002),
social media further problematize the distinction, insofar as
the same platforms facilitate interpersonal interactions and
mass broadcasts. Nonetheless, this distinction continues to
shape research on social media rituals. Emphasizing the ex-
ceptional, Burgess et al. (2018) define social media rituals as
“platform-specific social media conventions and patterned
responses to acute events . . . characterised by the convergence
of private and personal audience practices with public dis-
course, in networked publics” (p. 230). Following this defini-
tion, the literature on social media rituals has primarily
focused on “acute events” of global relevance such as celeb-
rity deaths (Van den Bulck & Larsson, 2019). Yet, the lens of
ritual has also been applied to the study of everyday forms of
social media content such as the display of social support on
Twitter (Brownlie & Shaw, 2019) or the announcement of
New Year’s resolutions (Hallinan, Kim, Mizoroki et al.,
2021). Combining both research trajectories, we contend that
the concept of social media rituals can be applied to study a
broad range of social media content types, encompassing
both acute events and more mundane actions.
Accordingly, we propose an updated definition of social
media rituals as typified communicative practices on social
media that formalize and express shared values. Much like
their mainstream media counterparts, the values that under-
pin social media rituals relate to the techno-cultural logics
and communicative norms surrounding the medium itself. As
2 A typology of social media rituals
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article/27/4/zmac011/6644420 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Couldry (2002) notes, media participate in the performative
enactment of rituals, infusing them with media-specific values.
Thus, live televised coverage from the site of a natural disaster
not only conveys community values such as solidarity with
the victims but also upholds the media-related value of liven-
ess. As such, the mediated articulation of values often invokes
normative ideas about the act of communication itself, or
what Shifman (2019) refers to as communicative values. If
general values provide guidelines for how we should conduct
ourselves in a wide array of domains, communicative values
relate specifically to desirable modes of expression. For exam-
ple, the value of authenticity relates to both the imperative to
convey information that accurately represents the world and
to the expression of one’s “true” self (Shifman, 2018).
Authenticity is invoked in ritualized performances as varied
as confession cue cards (Hall, 2016), far-right commemora-
tion memes (Trillo` & Shifman, 2021), and strategic self-
branding by micro-celebrities (Marwick, 2017).
Genres as the building blocks of social media rituals
While social media rituals represent broad types of value-
infused action, their realization takes place through typified
genres of user-generated content. For example, ritualized
demotion can take the shape of customer complaints left on
companies’ Facebook pages or “plastic surgery gone
wrong” photos shaming celebrities. Following the litera-
ture, we refer to genres as socially recognized categories of
cultural expression that share elements of form, content,
and interpretative expectations (Miller, 1984; Mittell,
2001; Yates & Orlikowski, 1992).
Social media genres lack some of the “obligatoriness” typi-
cal of older media genres (Giltrow & Stein, 2009), in part be-
cause social media makes it easier to produce and circulate
content (Miller et al., 2016). Given the relative elusiveness of
social media genres, there have been few attempts to systemat-
ically categorize them (e.g., Hallinan, Kim, Scharlach et al.,
2021; Rieder et al., 2020; Westman & Freund, 2010).
Genres, however, remain fundamental for the production of
cultural content on social media (Milner, 2016), providing
users with recognizable templates for self-expression. Thus, a
growing body of knowledge investigates the cultural implica-
tions of specific social media genres, with the selfie represent-
ing a particularly prominent example (Frosh, 2015; Tifentale
& Manovich, 2015; Zappavigna, 2016).
Much like their analog counterparts, ritualized expression
through social media genres conveys values. For example,
Kumar (2021) connects the selfie and vlog to individualism
and self-disclosure respectively, arguing that these values are
tied to Western ideas of modernity that serve the interests of
social media corporations. Indeed, the norms regulating what
is valued on social media platforms—which are often formed
through negotiation between local values of users and the val-
ues promoted by the corporations themselves—may deter-
mine what rituals and genres achieve mainstream visibility,
which remain niche sub-cultural phenomena, and which are
simply not permitted (Hallinan, Kim, Scharlach et al., 2021).
The tangibility of genres combined with the conceptual
richness and reach of rituals offers a productive framework
for studying the construction of values in digital spheres.
Since rituals are broader and more enduring forms of interac-
tion than genres, using them as a higher-level classification
mechanism enables the creation of a stable scheme of catego-
rization for digital content. Generating a robust scheme of
rituals that account for popular genres can allow us to study
the dynamic environment of social media in a flexible way,
supporting the examination of future genres vis-a` -vis these
higher-level analytical categories. Our study thus addresses
two main questions: first, what are the main types of social
media rituals? And second, how do the different types of so-
cial media rituals relate to values?
Methods
Given the aforementioned scarcity of literature about social
media rituals, we draw upon two broader bodies of knowl-
edge as the starting points for our investigation: literature
about rituals and studies of social media genres. The first tra-
jectory helps establish the meaning and social functions of rit-
uals, while the second brings together accounts of existing
social media practices. As detailed below and illustrated in
Figure 1, we followed the principles of grounded theory and
constantly compared (Lindlof & Taylor, 2019) the two bodies
of knowledge in order to develop our typology of social media
rituals.
For rituals, we searched for existing classification schemas,
combining a top-down and bottom-up approach. First, we
conducted a cross-disciplinary literature review, drawing on
classic work from ritual studies (e.g., Grimes, 2013), anthro-
pology and sociology (e.g., Collins, 2004; Durkheim, 1995
[1915]; Goffman, 2005 [1967]), as well as work on media rit-
uals (e.g., Cottle, 2006; Couldry, 2002; Dayan & Katz, 1996)
and social medial rituals (e.g., Abel et al., 2021; Burgess et al.,
2018), to identify different types of rituals and logics of classi-
fication. As mentioned in the literature review, we found re-
markably few attempts at creating a broad typology of
rituals, with Grimes’ (2013) list of 18 ritual types being the
most systematic and holistic. We supplemented the list of rit-
uals yielded by this literature review with a bottom-up ap-
proach to classification, typing the phrase “ritual of. . .” into
Google Scholar and going through the alphabet to see auto-
fill suggestions. For any novel ritual types, we looked to the
recommended literature for a definition or description.
We applied a similar combination of top-down and
bottom-up approaches for our inspection of social media gen-
res. First, we built upon our prior genre research, which in-
cluded a review of titles and abstracts from 15 top media and
communication journals since 2005 to identify types of social
media content (Hallinan, Kim, Scharlach et al., 2021). We
supplemented the list generated from this top-down approach
with several empirical investigations of genres across the
globe, including an open-ended transnational survey of the
types of content that people like and dislike, structured inter-
views, and participant observation of five social media plat-
forms following principles outlined by boyd (2015). These
three methods were applied by a transnational (and multi-
lingual) team of researchers and participants from the United
States, Italy, South Korea, Germany, and Japan. Together,
these strategies resulted in an extensive list of over 200 social
media genres, including well-established ones like “makeup
tutorials,” “birthday wishes,” and “travel photos,” alongside
less well-documented genres like “commemoration memes,”
“personal diary manga,” and “algorithmic complaints.”
While this is certainly not an exhaustive account, it provides a
broad perspective on social media that crosses platforms,
communities, and languages.
zzJournal of Computer-Mediated Communication (2022), Vol. 27 3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article/27/4/zmac011/6644420 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Having created our lists of ritual types and social media
genres, we then moved to refine the former to better account
for the latter in a process we colloquially describe as match-
making. We aimed to create a typology of social media rituals
that accounts for the vast majority of genres we identified in
our literature-based and empirical research. We began from
Grimes’ list of 18 rituals, examined how other ritual types we
identified related to this schema, and used the list of social me-
dia genres to determine the applicability of each type to social
media. While we retained some of the original labels from
Grimes’ list (e.g., rites of commemoration), we also updated
some of them to improve intelligibility (e.g., “agonistic rites”
were relabeled as “rituals of competition”), dropped those
that had no direct equivalent in mainstream digital spheres
(e.g., “sacrificial rituals”), and added new types that Grimes
did not account for (e.g., “rituals of sensation” such as
ASMR videos). Our final list includes 16 distinct ritual types,
which accounted for the vast majority of the social media gen-
res we identified.
As we developed our list of ritual types, we sought to iden-
tify analytically distinct categories that encompass multiple
genres. We systematically developed and compared the defini-
tions of each ritual, making sure we could identify at least one
distinctive core feature. For example, while both subjectifica-
tion and taste signaling enact affiliation with a group, the for-
mer focuses on social roles while the latter focuses on cultural
preferences. Whereas the rituals we identified are analytically
distinct, a single social media genre may bring together multi-
ple rituals, a phenomenon we discuss below.
Finally, we conducted another round of analysis to examine
and corroborate the analytical power of the typology. This
round was based on data gathered by five research assistants
from the countries outlined above, who conducted participant
observations of Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, YouTube, and
Twitter during August 2021, exploring trending topics, plat-
form recommendations, and generic searches. This process
resulted in the identification of 572 social media genres.
Based on descriptions and examples provided by the research
assistants, the authors classified 547 of the genres into at least
one of the 16 categories following the principles of consensual
qualitative research (Hill et al., 1997). The descriptions of the
remaining 25 genres provided by the research assistants were
too thin to allow classification.
As we refined our typology, we worked to identify the core
values associated with each type of ritual. Since existing value
schemas such as Hofstede’s (2003) cultural dimensions or
Schwartz’s (2012) list of basic values do not readily map onto
social media practices (Hallinan, Kim, Scharlach et al., 2021;
Shifman, 2016), we employed an established value lexicon
from Christen et al. (2016) for a more communication-oriented
approach. The lexicon features 78 groups of value-related
terms in both English and German, organized according to
their cross-reference proximity in thesauruses and verified by
the assessment of an expert group. To expand cross-cultural
applicability beyond English and German, the international
team described above assessed the cultural resonance of the list
across six languages, coming to a strong consensus over 64
terms. Part of the process included relabeling the groups of
value terms for stronger cross-cultural resonance.
Working with the modified list of 64 values and the list of
16 rituals, each of the authors independently assigned up to
five values per ritual, guided by the following questions:
which modes of behavior and states of affairs does the ritual
frame as desirable? What counts as good communication
according to this ritual? We then discussed our responses in
several extended sessions following the principles of
Figure 1. A summary of the study’s methods and main analytical stages.
4 A typology of social media rituals
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article/27/4/zmac011/6644420 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
consensual qualitative research (Hill et al., 1997). While the
number of possible values associated with each ritual is poten-
tially boundless, we sought to focus on fewer values with
stronger consensus for our exploratory study. These delibera-
tions resulted in agreement among the authors over a list of
two core values and one communicative value for each ritual.
Although some rituals had strong agreement on more values,
we chose to use the minimal number of two values per ritual
to ensure consistency. Finally, we compared the values associ-
ated with each ritual, looking for affinities and tensions.
Findings
Our typology consists of 16 social media rituals, each associ-
ated with distinctive genres of user-generated content and a
diverse set of values ranging from respect and responsibility
to materialism and pleasure. As a general observation, we
found that some veteran ritual forms readily translate to so-
cial media, such as the migration of a face-to-face tarot read-
ing to an algorithmically recommended tarot reading on
TikTok, while others are not reflected in mainstream content,
including many sacrificial rituals. And sometimes, newer so-
cial media practices lack clear predecessors among older ritual
categories, such as the production of tingles and parasociality
associated with ASMR videos. Overall, we found an impres-
sive amount of continuity between older ritual types and
newer media practices, supporting our general contention
that rituals are more enduring forms of interaction than gen-
res, making them especially useful for studying the dynamic
environment of social media.
In what follows, we define each ritual type, briefly discuss
two exemplary genres, and present the core values associated
with the ritual (see Table 1 for a summary). After introducing
each ritual, we describe how they reflect different notions of
good communication, that is, their communicative values.
Before outlining our typology, we wish to make the following
clarifications. While each ritual is analytically distinct, some
genres combine multiple rituals into a single practice. For ex-
ample, there is a trend of makeup product review videos that
call out racism in the beauty industry (Lawson, 2021). In this
genre, content creators present their audiences with an evalua-
tion of the product under scrutiny. However, they also con-
demn racial inequality by exposing, for example, the limited
range of options available for darker skin tones and, in turn,
the racial bias of the cosmetic industry and the beauty stand-
ards on which it is built, thus integrating rituals of evaluation
and demotion.
Relatedly, while our typology identifies two core values for
each ritual type, these are by no means the only values that
such rituals entail. Different genres of social media content of-
ten express other commitments beyond the core values associ-
ated with their respective ritual type. For example, the genre
of “tech review” videos embeds the core values of knowledge
and excellence characterizing rituals of evaluation, but also
promotes genre-specific values such as novelty and efficiency.
Hence, our claim is not that each ritual type is exclusively
characterized by the core values listed in the typology, but
rather that those values are central to the ritual type and ap-
pear in all genres that fall within its scope.
Rituals of promotion
Rituals of promotion seek to elevate the status, visibility, rec-
ognition, or regard of something or someone. For example,
“new job announcement” tweets highlight a noteworthy ac-
complishment that positively reflects on the poster, while
influencers who publish “sponsored content” on Instagram
elevate the status of a product through their personal endorse-
ment. By sharing good news or recommending a product,
people affirm that distinctive individuals and objects should
be held in high regard. Thus, such rituals uphold the values of
reputation (people should seek esteem, status, or popularity)
and excellence (people should strive to be, or appreciate that
which is, of superior merit).
Rituals of demotion
Rituals of demotion seek to lower the status, visibility, rec-
ognition, or regard of something or someone. For example,
“Karen” YouTube videos criticize the behavior of someone
(typically a white woman) who harasses others in public,
while “customer complaint” tweets draw attention to busi-
nesses that violate the expectations of consumers. By calling
out unacceptable behavior or service, people reinforce
shared standards of conduct and inspire compliance from
others. Thus, such rituals are predicated on conformity
(people should act in accordance with socially accepted
norms) and responsibility (people should fulfill their duties
and obligations).
Rituals of evaluation
Rituals of evaluation subject someone or something to evalua-
tion, scrutiny, or critical analysis. For example, “product
review” videos describe a product and judge its merit, while
“tier list” memes place related objects within a set of hierar-
chical categories. Through the practice of reviewing or rank-
ing, people affirm the role of information in establishing the
relative merit of individuals and objects. Thus, such rituals
are predicated on knowledge (people should seek truth and/or
understanding through study, experience, or reasoning) and
excellence (people should strive to be, or appreciate that
which is, of superior merit).
Rituals of requesting
Rituals of requesting ask for aid or support for a person,
group, or cause. For example, “crowdfunding requests” share
information about a particular issue in order to obtain the fi-
nancial support of others, while “information-seeking” posts
pose a question to gather audience input. Asking for resources
or information expresses the belief that people should help
each other. Thus, such rituals are predicated on care (people
should be actively concerned about and/or provide support
for someone or something) and altruism (people should be
concerned for the well-being of others and willing to help
them, regardless of the personal impact).
Rituals of transformation
Rituals of transformation document how someone or some-
thing has changed over time as a result of the exertion of
creativity or skill. For example, “home makeover” videos
show the progressive transformation of a house, while
“before and after” fitness photos track improved fitness
levels. By documenting the process of transformation, peo-
ple celebrate the ability to produce desirable changes. Thus,
such rituals are predicated on progress (people should
strive for improvement over time) and control (people
should strive to influence the actions, functions, and/or out-
comes of someone or something).
zzJournal of Computer-Mediated Communication (2022), Vol. 27 5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article/27/4/zmac011/6644420 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
Rituals of competition
Rituals of competition assess the relative merit of someone or
something by measuring their performance against others.
For example, “video game speedruns” document a player’s
attempt to complete a game in record time, while “political
debate” streams feature individuals determining the relative
merit of their positions on a topic through argumentation. By
recording a gamer’s best performance or sparring over ideas,
people invoke the notion that individuals should consistently
strive to distinguish themselves from others. Thus, such rituals
are predicated on effort (people should devote significant time
and/or energy toward something) and excellence (people
should strive to be, or appreciate that which is, of superior
merit).
Rituals of consumption
Rituals of consumption document the act of consuming some-
thing, including material objects, cultural products, and food.
For example, “unboxing” videos portray someone opening
the packaging of a product and tactilely interacting with it,
while “mukbang” videos record someone eating. By docu-
menting the process of eating or encounters with manufac-
tured goods, people affirm the role of objects as sources of
individual enjoyment. Thus, such rituals are predicated upon
materialism (people should acquire and appreciate material
possessions or cultural goods) and pleasure (people should
seek enjoyable and satisfying experiences).
Rituals of sensation
Rituals of sensation seek to produce an altered state of mind
or consciousness through media stimulation. For example,
“ASMR tapping” videos use sounds to elicit feelings of calm-
ness and tranquility, while “oddly satisfying” GIFs display
images of objects that are unexpectedly visually pleasing due
to their texture or symmetry. By sharing relaxing audio tracks
or mesmerizing shapes, people highlight the role of sensory
stimulation in provoking enjoyment. Thus, such rituals are
predicated upon aesthetics (people should cultivate and ap-
preciate things that are pleasing to the senses, especially sight)
and pleasure (people should seek enjoyable and satisfying
experiences).
Rituals of taste signaling
Rituals of taste signaling enact association with others
through aesthetic preferences or highly patterned modes of
cultural expression. For example, TikTok “dance challenges”
iterate popular choreography to affirm someone’s belonging
within a community that is up-to-speed on platform trends,
while “deep fried” memes feature grainy or washed-out
images that are only recognizable to others with previous
knowledge of the meme. By sharing their interpretations of
cultural trends, people draw upon their qualities of inventive-
ness and affiliation with taste-based communities. Thus, such
rituals promote the values of creativity (people should re-
spond to situations and/or express themselves in original,
Table 1. A summary of our typology of social media rituals
Ritual type Core values Communicative value Iconic genres
Promotion Reputation Persuasion New job announcement
Excellence #sponsoredcontent posts
Demotion Conformity Persuasion “Karen” videos
Responsibility Customer complaints
Evaluation Knowledge Persuasion Tech reviews
Excellence Tier list memes
Requesting Care Persuasion Crowdfunding requests
Altruism Information seeking (e.g., housing, jobs)
Transformation Progress Demonstration Home/room makeover videos
Control Before and after fitness photos
Sensation Aesthetics Demonstration ASMR videos
Pleasure “Oddly Satisfying” videos and gifs
Consumption Materialism Demonstration Unboxing or haul videos
Pleasure Mukbang videos
Competition Effort Demonstration Video game speedruns
Excellence Political debate videos
Taste signaling Creativity Affiliation Viral TikTok dances
Aesthetics Deep fried memes
Commemoration Loyalty Affiliation Celebrity death tweets (#RIP__)
Respect Facebook memorial pages
Relationship work Intimacy Affiliation YouTube apology videos
Care Happy birthday wishes
Pledging Commitment Affiliation Profile picture filters (“I stand with. . .”)
Responsibility New year’s resolutions
Subjectification Reputation Authenticity Family vacation photos
Conformity Best friend selfies
Disclosure Transparency Authenticity Day-in-the-life vlogs
Control Ask me anything Q&A’s
Forecasting Knowledge Authenticity TikTok tarot readings
Control Sports predictions
Advising Knowledge Authenticity Workout dos and don’ts
Care Software tutorial videos (e.g., Excel)
The ritual types are listed according to the order in which they are discussed in the article.
6 A typology of social media rituals
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article/27/4/zmac011/6644420 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
imaginative ways) and aesthetics (people should cultivate/ap-
preciate that which is pleasing to the senses, especially sight).
Rituals of commemoration
Rituals of commemoration mark the passage of time and indi-
cate that something or someone should be remembered, cele-
brated, or respected. For example, “celebrity death” tweets
facilitate collective mourning at the recent death of a celebrity,
while Facebook “memorial pages” establish de facto digital
memorials where users can pay their respects to a friend.
Through such commemorations, people affirm the impor-
tance of those that have passed away. Thus, such rituals pro-
mote the values of loyalty (people should consistently support
and align with something or someone that they deem impor-
tant) and respect (people should be treated with consideration
or dignity).
Rituals of relationship work
Rituals of relationship work initiate, maintain, or repair rela-
tionships with others, whether dyadic ties or groups of people.
For example, YouTube “apology” videos seek to repair the
relationship between a creator and their audience after an ac-
tual or perceived breach of conduct, while Facebook “happy
birthday wishes” perform relationship ties through the public
display of wishes on someone’s Facebook wall. Through well-
wishing messages or apology videos, people show concern for
one another and consequently cultivate close ties. Such rituals
thus promote the values of intimacy (people should cultivate
and appreciate close connections with others) and care (peo-
ple should be actively concerned about and/or provide sup-
port for someone or something).
Rituals of pledging
Rituals of pledging declare a commitment to a cause or ac-
tion. For example, Facebook “profile picture filters” declare
solidarity with a given community or cause through a textual
and symbolic photo overlay, while “New Year’s resolution”
tweets present someone’s personal goals for the year to come.
By openly making pledges, people signal their dedication to a
cause as well as their sense of duty to fulfill it. Thus, such rit-
uals promote the values of commitment (people should be
willing to give time, effort, and/or resources to someone or
something that they believe in) and responsibility (people
should fulfill their duties and obligations toward someone or
something).
Rituals of subjectification
In rituals of subjectification, people construct themselves as
social subjects through the presentation of desirable identities.
For example, “family vacation” photos reaffirm and cement
someone’s status as a member of a happy family unit through
photos of the family smiling on holiday, while “best friend
selfies” document the social interactions of a set of friends
and restate their bond. By performing as “father,”
“daughter,” or “best friend,” people affirm the worth of these
social identities. Thus, such rituals promote the values of rep-
utation (people should seek esteem, status, or popularity
according to a particular idea of what that entails) and con-
formity (people should act in accordance with socially ac-
cepted norms).
Rituals of disclosure
Rituals of disclosure make public something that would oth-
erwise be considered personal, secret, hidden, or private.
These rituals are not limited to personal disclosure, but also
encompass the exposure of information about others. For ex-
ample, “day-in-the-life” vlogs reveal information about some-
one’s daily life, while “ask me anything” Instagram Q&As
publicly respond to audience-submitted questions using the
“Stories” function. By offering a sneak peek into someone’s
daily life or exposing someone’s latest indiscretion, people
promote the value of transparency (people should openly con-
vey information as they know it), which we will later associ-
ate with the communicative value of authenticity. In addition,
these rituals also promote the value of control (people should
strive to influence the actions, functions, and/or outcomes of
someone or something), understood as mastery over the dis-
closure of information.
Rituals of forecasting
Rituals of forecasting seek to predict, prognosticate, or proph-
esy a future event or trend. For example, TikTok “tarot read-
ings” interpret the cards for an unknown viewer connected
only by the recommendation algorithm, while “sports pre-
diction” videos predict the outcome of an upcoming event
such as the FIFA World Cup. By making such forecasts, indi-
viduals express an enduring human desire to know and influ-
ence the future. Thus, such rituals promote the values of
knowledge (people should seek truth and/or understanding
through study, experience, or reasoning) and control (people
should strive to influence the actions, functions, and/or out-
comes of someone or something), understood as mastery over
the future.
Rituals of advising
Rituals of advising offer advice or information regarding a
topic, area of life, or situation. For example, “workout do’s
and don’ts” share knowledge about fitness and inform audi-
ences about effective workout routines, while “software
tutorial” videos provide audiences with detailed instructions
on how to perform different tasks with a software package
like Microsoft Excel. By providing others with potentially use-
ful tips or skills, people affirm that individuals should help
one another by sharing information and expertise. Such rit-
uals promote the values of knowledge (people should seek
truth and/or understanding through study, experience, or rea-
soning) and care (people should be actively concerned about
and/or provide support for someone or something).
Communicative values
Beyond core values, we also identified four values that we
conceptualize as communicative values: persuasion, demon-
stration, affiliation, and authenticity. As discussed in the liter-
ature review, such values offer guidelines for understanding
what constitutes desirable communication. While the four
communicative values, to some extent, infuse all of the rituals
in our typology, their salience varies across the different types
of rituals, with specific communicative values playing a par-
ticularly pivotal role in some and not others. We thus treat
these values as useful tools to differentiate between the types
of communicative actions that rituals seek to accomplish.
The communicative value of persuasion is central in the rit-
uals of promotion, demotion, evaluation, and requesting. In
zzJournal of Computer-Mediated Communication (2022), Vol. 27 7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article/27/4/zmac011/6644420 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
all four ritual types, people overtly seek to convince others
that something is worth elevating, degrading, buying, watch-
ing, playing, or supporting. Through these rituals, people not
only attempt to persuade others but also convey a normative
message about persuasive communication, namely that people
should strive to communicate in a way that influences the be-
havior of others or the course of events.
The communicative value of demonstration characterizes
the rituals of transformation, sensation, consumption, and
competition. In these rituals, visual evidence and stimuli are
crucial to eliciting pleasurable responses in the audience,
proving that something or someone has changed over time, or
documenting the outcome of a competition. In turn, these
promote demonstration as a value, namely conveying the
message that people should express themselves through exhi-
bition or the visual display of evidence.
The communicative value of affiliation is crucial to rituals
of taste signaling, commemoration, relationship work, and
pledging. In these rituals, people show their belonging to cul-
turally defined units or causes by participating in activities
that express (sub)cultural taste, allegiance to collective mem-
ory, dyadic bonds, or individual commitment. As such, they
promote the value of affiliation in communication, namely
that people should express themselves to show support or af-
filiation with a group or cause.
Finally, the communicative value of authenticity is pivotal
to rituals of advising, forecasting, disclosure, and subjectifi-
cation. In these rituals, people position themselves as sharing
truthful information with others, accurately prognosticating
the future, revealing formerly secret information, or affirm-
ing their authentic selves. Overall, these ritual types convey
the notion that people should express themselves in a way
that corresponds with external reality or with internal es-
sence. The notion of authenticity is closely associated with
the value of truthfulness, which has been widely discussed in
relation to journalism (Zelizer, 2009). The two values are
very close in meaning, with slightly different connotations.
“Truthfulness” is often associated with correspondence to
external reality, while “authenticity” is usually associated
with correspondence to one’s essence or culture. In this arti-
cle, we chose to use “authenticity” because of its prominence
in studies of social media (Cunningham & Craig, 2017; Lee,
2020; Marwick, 2017).
Discussion
Participation in social media rituals valorizes ideals like excel-
lence and altruism, knowledge and pleasure, respect and aes-
thetics. Although some values such as conformity, care, and
control may seem more pivotal than others, it is important to
note that the theoretical dispersion of values need not align
with their empirical prevalence on social media platforms.
Some types of rituals (e.g., promotion or transformation) are
especially prominent and encompass a wide variety of popu-
lar genres across platforms, while others (e.g., forecasting)
seem to be narrower in their application.
Widening the conceptual scope beyond the values intrinsic
to each ritual, we can also point to overarching values that
are fundamental to all social media rituals. Regardless of the
type, participation in any ritual requires adherence to the rules
of expressive genres. Milner (2016) explains this general prin-
ciple as the combination of “fixity” and “novelty” in meme
creation. Translating this notion to the conceptual language
of values, we contend that a tension between conformity and
creativity underpins all social media rituals. In contrast to tra-
ditional religious rituals that are supposed to closely follow a
set of rules, the “networked individualism” (Wellman et al.,
2006) underpinning communication on social media stresses
both communal identities that demand some kind of confor-
mity and creative self-expression that highlights individuality
(Shifman, 2016). That is to say, in the context of social media
rituals, communication needs to be patterned (conformist)
enough to be recognized as a ritual while still serving an indi-
vidual need for self-expression (creativity).
Complementing this general outlook, we identified a total
of 19 values underpinning our 16 ritual types. Some of these
values are specific to one ritual (e.g., altruism for rituals of
requesting), while others are recurrent and cut across different
rituals. The nine values that occur in multiple rituals are aes-
thetics, care, conformity, control, excellence, knowledge, plea-
sure, reputation, and responsibility. In light of their
applicability to a wide range of social media genres, this list is
a fruitful starting point for future research aiming to identify
the core values of user-generated content. This model also
enables researchers to identify values that are specific to indi-
vidual genres or subgenres. For example, while all genres clas-
sifiable as rituals of transformation express the core values of
progress and control, the specific genre of “decluttering” also
invokes the value of aesthetics, “do-it-yourself” videos em-
phasize efficacy, and “before and after” fitness photos stress
effort. This type of analysis can also apply to subgenres cre-
ated by individuals or social movements to specifically pro-
mote certain values. Consider again the example of the
“makeup review” videos that take a stance for racial justice
discussed above. Such videos embed the values of knowledge
and excellence inherent to rituals of evaluation and also com-
bine them with political commitments to justice, equality, and
representation.
Going beyond the core values expressed via user-generated
content, we also highlight that social media rituals involve
normative ideas of what counts as good communication. The
rituals in our typology present four ideal types of what com-
munication on social media should look like and what pur-
pose it serves: authenticity, persuasion, affiliation, and
demonstration. Of course, these communicative values are
much older than social media platforms. The idea that au-
thenticity, persuasion, affiliation, and demonstration are cen-
tral principles of communication can be traced back to Plato
and Aristotle. Over the years, each of these communicative
values has been associated with distinct subdisciplines within
the field of communication scholarship, with truth highlighted
by journalism scholars, persuasion studied in political com-
munication and marketing, affiliation foregrounded by socio-
linguists studying speech communities and cultural studies
scholars tracing fan cultures, and demonstration (as well as
related concepts such as “monstration”; Dayan, 2009) widely
discussed in media scholarship on television.
Many accounts stress how these four communicative values
can contradict each other—telling the truth might undermine
one’s affiliation to certain groups and a quick glimpse at any
given advertisement may invoke gloomy thoughts about possi-
ble contrasts between persuasion and authenticity. However,
as we acknowledge above, while these communicative values
reflect different areas of emphasis, they are by no means mutu-
ally exclusive. And indeed, successful campaigns on social me-
dia may derive their power from the explicit combination of
8 A typology of social media rituals
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article/27/4/zmac011/6644420 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
these four values. Consider the recent case of vaccine selfies, in
which people show themselves receiving the COVID-19 vac-
cine. This practice invokes the communicative values of authen-
ticity and demonstration by portraying the process of receiving
the vaccine. Simultaneously, such selfies also try to persuade
others to get the shot and showcase affiliation with a commu-
nity of like-minded people.
Conclusion
This article presents the first comprehensive analysis and ty-
pology of social media rituals, organized according to their
function and constitutive values. The development of the ty-
pology brings together literature on ritual theory with re-
search on social media genres, supplemented with a
transnational survey of users and participant observation of
social media platforms. Our typology outlines 16 different so-
cial media rituals, provides definitions and exemplary genres,
and identifies the core values inherent to each ritual type. We
also identify ideas about what each ritual considers good
communication, organizing them into four groups character-
ized by the communicative values of authenticity, demonstra-
tion, affiliation, and persuasion.
By way of conclusion, we wish to reflect on two ways that
this study contributes to the broader body of knowledge on
media rituals. First, our typology bridges the gap between re-
search that is interested in the “exceptional” aspects of media
and social media rituals (e.g., monumental events, influencers,
politicians) and the more “mundane” aspects embedded in
media use (e.g., birthday wishes, selfies, memes). As
highlighted by Miller et al.’s (2016) understanding of social
media as “scalable sociality,” users produce and circulate con-
tent at different scales based on the level of privacy they wish
to retain and the size of the public they aspire to reach.
Building on this insight, we suggest that the social media rit-
uals in our typology can be performed at different scales with
different levels of publicity. For example, rituals of commem-
oration span from the highly exceptional, global, and public
character of mourning David Bowie on Twitter on the day of
his death to the relatively mundane and private character of
the annual remembrance of a beloved pet on one’s personal
Facebook profile.
Second, drawing inspiration from the macro-level analy-
sis of mass media events and rituals (Cottle, 2006; Dayan
& Katz, 1996), the holistic orientation of our typology may
facilitate systematic investigation of the interactions be-
tween types of social media content. As some of our exam-
ples showcase, different genres or different ritual types are
created with awareness of each other, and often as a reac-
tion or as a response to the values voiced by other genres or
rituals. For instance, the value of materialism embedded in
rituals of consumption is questioned in genres such as closet
“decluttering” videos (Zappavigna, 2019) where partici-
pants get rid of stuff they no longer need and “anti-haul”
videos where participants outline all the products they plan
not to buy (Wood, 2021). These genres respectively repre-
sent examples of rituals of transformation and rituals of
pledging that challenge the values associated with rituals of
consumption. Understanding the interactions driving the
production of new units of content, genres, and rituals may
shed light on how users negotiate different understandings
of what is important in life.
We thus see this typology as the first step in a systematic
broad-scale analysis of user-generated genres and the values
they embed. We hope that our work will facilitate more nu-
anced mappings of digital culture, understood as constituted
by a multitude of platforms, communities, national groups,
and subcultures. At the bird’s eye level of digital culture, our
framework can assist in studying the prevalence of different
practices. We have reason to think that the rituals in our ty-
pology vary in their popularity and diversity. For instance, rit-
uals of transformation seem to be both very popular and very
diverse, encompassing photo-based genres such as “before
and after” fitness photos and video-based genres such as
TikTok “outfit transformations.” Rituals of forecasting, on
the other hand, seem to be both less popular and less diverse,
heavily focused on astrology and sports. Mapping the preva-
lence of different practices provides a way to think broadly
about the role of social media in society and to examine the
values that are propagated—and those that are overlooked—
through social media content.
Zooming in, the ritual framework allows us to examine the
multiple cultural formulations that are expressed on social
media. One pivotal lens is that of the platform: while many
rituals manifest across platforms, further studies may identify
associations between specific platforms and ritual types (e.g.,
promotion and affiliation on Instagram, disclosure and demo-
tion on Twitter). Comparison between platforms can illumi-
nate the specific features of platform cultures, revealing
different factors that incentivize or disincentivize particular
rituals and, with that, the expression of particular values.
Furthermore, the typology provides a way to examine how
platform cultures develop over time. The progressive profes-
sionalization of YouTube creators offers a very clear example
where the original emphasis on disclosure exemplified by the
slogan “broadcast yourself” and typified by its first major
genre of vlogging (Burgess & Green, 2018) has progressively
made room for a range of other social media rituals (advising,
consumption, sensation, promotion, and evaluation).
A second possible lens of comparison relates to different
locales. The notion of the local is incredibly varied and
includes transnational comparisons (Hallinan, Kim, Mizoroki
et al., 2021), major communities on a platform (e.g., Brock,
2020), niche subcultures (Zannettou et al., 2018), and social
media movements (Caren et al., 2012). Despite this diversity,
our schema of social media rituals provides a coherent frame-
work for cross-cultural comparisons. At the level of national
culture, patterns in the adoption of rituals of disclosure and
promotion may confirm or contest deep-seated assumptions
regarding the globalization of values in the digital age. Thus,
we might find differences in both the presence of various rit-
ual types and in the ways particular rituals are executed. For
instance, our research has revealed that rituals of disclosure
focusing on personal hardship are common in United States
but fairly infrequent in Japan, where norms around expres-
sion and privacy result in anonymized personal narratives that
substitute personal photos with manga illustrations. At the sub-
cultural level, a comparative analysis of rituals of disclosure, de-
motion, and requesting may shed light on the different ways in
which local communities use social media affordances to mobi-
lize politically. For example, an analysis of demotion rituals fo-
cusing on “the elite” by far-right and far-left subcultures may
help us identify similarities and differences between populist
movements.
zzJournal of Computer-Mediated Communication (2022), Vol. 27 9
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article/27/4/zmac011/6644420 by Brian Mills on 25 June 2025
We are conscious that our 16 categories cannot order all
social media. However comprehensive, some content will
necessarily fall outside of the scope of our typology. Our ap-
proach deliberately focuses on mainstream user-generated
genres, intentionally excluding fringe content that is subject
to removal due to the moderation policies of the platforms,
such as sexually explicit content or graphic depictions of vi-
olence. We also do not focus on content produced by legacy
media corporations (news, sport, and music) despite their
popularity on social media. Furthermore, the typology was
built mainly in reference to genres that are prominent on
major social media platforms, potentially missing ritualized
forms of participation that are specific to image boards
(e.g., 4Chan) and other subcultural platforms (e.g., VK).
Finally, our study is surely strengthened by its transnational
character but remains limited by the positionality of the
researchers and our focus on social media content in lan-
guages primarily associated with the Global North. Hence,
our typology would benefit from further testing of its appli-
cability with content produced in other locations and
regions, particularly user-generated content originating in
the Global South.
Limitations notwithstanding, this article represents the first
systematic attempt to identify emergent patterns within the
messy universe of user-generated content through the higher-
level conceptual category of rituals that are broader than
social media genres and more stable over time. Having under-
gone the ritualized “evaluation” of peer review, we hope this
article will further “promote” the idea of social media rituals.
We “pledge” our commitment to expanding this work in fu-
ture comparative studies, and “request” that you, the patient
reader, join us in this endeavor.
Data availability
The data underlying this article will be shared on reasonable
request to the corresponding author.
Acknowledgments
We are indebted to the three anonymous reviewers and the
editors for their collegial and insightful comments on this
manuscript. We also thank our colleagues Nicholas John,
Paul Frosh, CJ Reynolds, Avishai Green, Rebecca Scharlach,
and Saki Mizoroki for their valuable feedback. The members
of our international advisory board were extremely helpful in
igniting the idea for this project and we are grateful for that.
Finally, we thank our team of research assistants for the me-
ticulous coding and participant observation of social media
platforms.
Funding
This project has received funding from the European
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program [Grant
Agreement No. 819004].
Conflicts of interest: All authors declare that they have no
conflicts of interest.
