POLICY AND THE POLIHEURISTIC THEORY OF FOREIGN
POLICY DECISION MAKING: A SYMPOSIUM
Applied Decision Analysis: Utilizing
Poliheuristic Theory to Explain and Predict
Foreign Policy and National Security
Decisions
A LEX MINTZ
Texas A&M University
and
Yale University
In recent years, more than 40 articles and chapters have utilized Poli-
heuristic Theory to analyze critical decisions made by foreign leaders
and U.S. presidents. In this paper, I introduce the Poliheuristic Proce-
dureFa series of steps that one can use to explain or predict decisions
by world leaders. Subsequent articles in this Symposium present exam-
ples of poliheuristic analyses of decisions made by Presidents Carter,
Clinton, Gorbachev, Mussaref and Saddam Hussein. These case studies
provide strong support for Poliheuristic Theory: leaders use a two-stage
process in making decisions: they first use simple heuristics to eliminate
alternatives based on the avoid-major-political-loss principle, and then
use more analytic calculations in selecting an alternative from a subset of
surviving alternatives.
Keywords: poliheuristic theory, decision theory, foreign policy analysis
The poliheuristic (PH) theory of decision postulates that leaders make decisions
according to a two-stage decision process. They first simplify the decision problem
by the use of cognitive short-cuts (heuristics). They then evaluate remaining alter-
natives using analytic calculations (Mintz, 1993, 2003, 2004a; Payne, Bettman, and
Johnson, 1993; Mintz and Geva, 1997; Mintz, Geva, Redd, and Carnes, 1997). One
heuristic frequently used by political leaders in the first stage of the decision process
is: avoid major political loss (the non-compensatory principle): alternatives that are
potentially harmful to the leaders are discarded outright (Mintz, 1993, 1995;
2004a; Kinne, 2005; Redd, 2005).
PH decision theory integrates elements of the rational choice school of decision
making with elements of the cognitive psychology school of decision. Key findings
of the PH research program are:
1. Leaders use more than one decision rule en route to a decision. Specifically,
policy makers use a two-stage process in making decisions: they employ the
r 2005 International Studies Association.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA, and 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
International Studies Perspectives (2005) 6, 94–98.
non-compensatory, avoid-major-loss principle in the initial screening of alter-
natives, and use analytic decision rules in the second stage of the decision
process.
2. Leaders evaluate gains and losses in political termsF domestic politics is ‘‘the
essence of decision’’ (Mintz and Geva, 1997).
PH theory has been applied to the analysis of decisions by U.S. presidents: Dwight
Eisenhower’s decision not to use force at Dien Bien Phu (DeRouen, 2003) and his
decision to use covert forces in Guatemala (Taylor-Robinson and Redd, 2003);
Jimmy Carter Iran’s hostage rescue decision (Brule, 2005), Ronald Reagan’s de-
cision to intervene in Grenada (DeRouen, 2001); George Bush Sr.’s decision to
attack Iraq (Mintz, 1993); Bill Clinton’s Kosovo decision (Redd, 2005), and George
W. Bush’s 2003 decision to invade Iraq (Mintz, 2004c).
The theory has also been used to analyze decisions by foreign leaders in dem-
ocratic and non-democratic polities: foreign policy decisions made by Chinese
leaders (James and Zhang, 2004), the Soviet leadership (Kinne, 2005), the Turkish
parliament (Mintz, 2004a), the Syrian leadership (Astorino-Courtois and Trusty,
2000), Pakistani leaders (Sathasivam, 2003; Kinne, 2005), Iranian leaders (Maleki,
2002), the Iraqi leader (Mintz, 2004c, and Kinne, 2005), Palestinian leaders
(Clare, 2003; Mintz and Mishal, 2003), and Israeli leaders (Mintz, 1995). For an
application of PH theory to policy makers’ decisions at the state and local level,
see Christensen and Marlowe (2004). Multi-method tests of the theory (utilizing
experimental, formal, and statistical analyses) 1 provided strong evidence for the
theory.2
Below I introduce a unified procedure that can be applied to the analysis of
leaders’ decisions on foreign and national security policy. This procedure can help
us understand how leaders make decisions and explain and predict their choices.
The PH procedure consists of two key steps:
1. Identify the decision matrix of the leader (e.g., the alternative set, dimension
set, and implications of each alternative on each dimension).3
2. Apply PH calculations to the decision matrix to explain or predict the ultimate
choice.
PH theory is generic. It is applicable to national security decisions, foreign policy
decisions, foreign economic decisions, as well as to domestic decisions (e.g., As-
torino-Courtois, 2000; DeRouen, 2003; Sathasivam, 2003). The PH procedure can
be extended to sequential decisions, interactive decisions, in dynamic and static
settings, in familiar and unfamiliar contexts, and under conditions of uncertainty
and/or ambiguity.
1 A Special Issue of The Journal of Conflict Resolution (2004) offers theoretical extensions and multiple tests of PH
theory using multiple methods (statistical, formal, and experimental) as follows: DeRouen and Sprecher (2004)
tested N-nations’ initial reaction to crisis using a probit model; Dacey and Carlson (2004) used a formal model to
illustrate, extend, and critique aspects of the theory, while Christensen and Redd (2004) and Mintz (2004b) used
experimental methods to test the theory in familiar versus unfamiliar settings (Mintz, 2004b), as well as in com-
parison to the Bureaucratic Politics model (Christensen and Redd, 2004). These multi-method tests of PH theory
provided strong evidence for the theory.
2 PH theory can be refuted and falsified if the decision process is compensatory or holistic or alternative-based, or
order insensitive.
3 See Redd (2005), Brule (2005), Kinne (2005) for the use of a variety of sources for identifying the decision
matrix of leaders.
A LEX MINTZ 95
Unraveling the Decision Calculus of Leaders
I. Identify the Decision Matrix of the Leader
A decision matrix consists of a set of alternatives the leader has, the policy dimen-
sions (or criteria) for selecting among these alternatives, and an assessment of the
implications of each dimension for each alternative. Weights (or importance level)
can be optionally added for each of the dimensions, if the analyst observes that
dimensions should receive unequal weight in the analysis.
Alternatives
Identify the policy alternatives that the leader has. For example: Do Nothing, Use
Force, Apply Sanctions. Or, in another example applicable to terrorist organiza-
tions: Continue with Terrorist Attacks, Temporarily Halt Attacks, or Stop Attacks.
Dimensions
Identify the dimensions (criteria) that are relevant in evaluating the alternatives in
the matrix: for example, in the Use of Force case, the dimensions typically are:
political, military, economic, and diplomatic (James and Zhang, 2004).
Implications
Each alternative course of action has implications on each dimension: for example,
the Use of Force alternative has military, economic, political, and diplomatic con-
sequences.
Ratings
Implications can be rated, for example, from  10 (very bad) to 110 (very good),
although assigning numerical ratings to implications is optional. For example, if
Doing Nothing while facing an attack by an adversary is likely to result in an
electoral defeat of the leader, then the analyst should assign a negative rating (very
bad,  8 or even  9) to the political implication of Do Nothing. In contrast, if Use
of Force may lead to a ‘‘Rally ‘round the Flag’’ effect, then the Use of Force al-
ternative should receive a positive (e.g., 18 or 19) rating.
Weights
Weights indicate the importance level of each dimension, for example, from 0
(not important at all) to 10 (very important). Thus, in the Use of Force example,
the analyst assigns different weights to the military, economic, political, and
Alternatives
Dimensions Do Nothing Apply
Sanctions Containment Use Force Weight
Military Implications Implications Implications Implications Add
Economic Implications Implications Implications Implications Add
Political Implications Implications Implications Implications Add
Diplomatic Implications Implications Implications Implications Add
Final Choice:
Final Decision
F IG . 1. A Decision Matrix for the Use of Force Example
Poliheuristic Theory96
diplomatic dimensions, unless s/he considers dimensions as having equal weight in
the decision.
Figure 1 displays a hypothetical example of a decision matrix of the president’s
decision to use force in a crisis. The president’s alternatives are:
Do nothing;
containment;
apply sanctions;
use force.
The decision criteria or dimensions are: military, economic, political, and diplo-
matic. The Decision Board software (http://www.decisionboard.org/academic) can
help the analyst create decision matrixes easily. These can then be analyzed using
the PH procedure. For a Decision Board application of decision-making processes
of would-be suicide bombers, see Mintz and Saper (2005).
II. Apply PH Calculations to the Decision Matrix
PH theory predicts that alternatives that have a very negative value on the political
dimension will be discarded first, while remaining alternatives will be evaluated
based on rational calculations. Based on the PH procedure, the analyst eliminates
from consideration alternatives that are harmful to the leader. For example, studies
have shown that because political considerations are important to political leaders,
then when the public strongly opposes doing nothing in the face of a foreign policy
crisis, the leader is likely to refrain from adopting passive options such as Do
Nothing. This is non-compensatory for the leader. Consequently, he is likely to
consider pro-active options as Apply Sanctions, or Use Force. Brule and Mintz
(2004) found strong empirical support for this thesis using data on U.S. uses of
force in the post-World War II era.
In the second stage of the decision, the president selects from the remaining
alternatives, the alternative that has the best net gain on all dimensions (or on the
dimension most important to the decision makerFa lexicographic decision strat-
egy). Expected utility calculations take into account the values and the probabilities
associated with each implication in the matrix in an attempt to select the alternative
with the highest net gain. The ultimate decision then is a combination of discarding
imfeasible alternatives in the first phase of the decision and selecting the best
alternative from the subset of acceptable alternatives in the second phase of the
decision.
The articles in this symposium analyze, using PH theory, several important de-
cisions:
1. President Carter’s decision to attempt to rescue the American hostages in Iran
(Brule, 2005)
2. President Clinton’s decision to attack Kosovo (Redd, 2005)
3. Decisions by authoritarian leaders (Kinne, 2005)
Together, they show how one can utilize PH theory to explain and predict decisions
by foreign and domestic leaders to use force, negotiate peace, avoid deploying
ground forces, apply sanctions, or do nothing.
References
A STORINO-C OURTOIS, A., AND B. TRUSTY (2000) ‘‘Degrees of Difficulty: The Effect of Israeli Policy
Shifts on Syrian Peace Decisions.’’ Journal of Conflict Resolution 44:359–377.
BRULE, D. (2005) ‘‘Explaining and Forecasting Leaders’ Decisions: A Poliheuristic Analysis of the Iran
Hostage Rescue Decision.’’ International Studies Perspectives 6:99–113.
A LEX MINTZ 97
BRULE, D., AND A. M INTZ (2004) ‘‘Public Opinion and Presidential Use of Force.’’ Paper presented at
the Annual Meeting of the International Studies Association, Montreal, Canada, March.
CHRISTENSEN, E. J. , AND J. M ARLOWE (2004) ‘‘Poliheuristic Decision-Making and the Character of
State–Local Relations.’’ Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management,
New Orleans, August.
CHRISTENSEN, E. J., AND S. B. R EDD (2004) ‘‘Bureaucrats vs. the Ballot Box in Foreign Policy Decision
Making: An Experimental Analysis of the Bureaucratic Politics Model and the Poliheuristic
Theory.’’ Journal of Conflict Resolution 48:69–90.
CLARE, J. (2003) ‘‘Loss Aversion and Patterns of Israeli-Palestinian Interactions: A Noncompensatory
Perspective.’’ Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the International Studies Association,
Portland, OR. February.
DACEY, R. , AND L. C ARLSON (2004) ‘‘Traditional Decision Analysis and the Poliheuristic Theory of
Foreign Policy Decision Making.’’ Journal of Conflict Resolution 48:38–55.
DEROUEN, K. (2001) Politics, Economics and Presidential Use of Force Decision Making. Lewiston, NY: The
Edwin Mellen Press.
DEROUEN, K. (2003) ‘‘The Decision Not to Use Force at Dien Bien Phu.’’ In Integrating Cognitive and
Rational Theories of Foreign Policy Decision Making, edited by A. Mintz, pp. 11–28. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
DEROUEN, K. , AND C. SPRECHER (2004) ‘‘Initial Crisis Reaction and Poliheuristic Theory.’’ Journal of
Conflict Resolution 48:56–68.
JAMES, P. , AND E. Z HANG (2004) ‘‘Chinese Choices: A Poliheuristic Analysis of Foreign Policy Crises:
1950–1996.’’ Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the International Studies Association,
Montreal, Canada, March.
KINNE, B. J. (2005) ‘‘Decision Making in Autocratic Regimes: A Poliheuristic Perspective.’’ International
Studies Perspectives 6:114–128.
MALEKI, A. (2002) ‘‘Decision Making in Iran’s Foreign Policy: A Heuristic Approach.’’ Journal of Social
Affairs 73:39–53.
MINTZ, A. (1993) ‘‘The Decision to Attack Iraq: A Noncompensatory Theory of Decision Making.’’
Journal of Conflict Resolution 37:595–618.
MINTZ, A. (1995) ‘‘The ‘Noncompensatory Principle’ of Coalition Formation.’’ Journal of Theoretical
Politics 7.
MINTZ, A., ed. (2003) Integrating Cognitive and Rational Theories of Foreign Policy Decision Making. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
MINTZ, A. (2004a) ‘‘How Do Leaders Make Decisions? A Poliheuristic Perspective.’’ Journal of Conflict
Resolution 48:3–13.
MINTZ, A. (2004b) ‘‘Foreign Policy Decision Making in Familiar and Unfamiliar Settings: An Exper-
imental Study of High-Ranking Military Officers.’’ Journal of Conflict Resolution 48:91–104.
MINTZ, A. (2004c) How Leaders Make Decisions. New Haven: United Nations Studies, Yale University.
MINTZ, A., AND N. GEVA (1997) ‘‘The Poliheuristic Theory of Foreign Policy Decision Making.’’ In
Decision Making on War and Peace: The Cognitive-Rational Debate, edited by N. Geva and A. Mintz,
pp. 81–101. Boulder: Lynne Rienner.
MINTZ, A., N. GEVA, S. REDD, AND A. CARNES (1997) ‘‘The Effect of Dynamic and Static Choice Sets on
Political Decision Making: An Analysis Using the Decision Board Platform.’’ American Political
Science Review 91:533–66.
MINTZ, A. , AND S. MISHAL (2003) ‘‘Decision Matrixes and Outcomes: Explaining Arafat and Sharon’s
Policy Alternatives and Dimensions During the Intifada.’’ Paper presented at the Gilman Con-
ference on New Directions in International Relations, Yale University, February.
MINTZ, A. , AND J. SAPER (2005) ‘‘How Suicide Bombers Think.’’ hhttp://www.yale.edu/unsy/i
PAYNE, J., J. B ETTMAN, AND E. JOHNSON (1993) The Adaptive Decision Maker. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
REDD, S. B. (2005) ‘‘The Influence of Advisers and Decision Strategies on Foreign Policy Choices:
President Clinton’s Decision to Use Force in Kosovo.’’ International Studies Perspectives 6:129–150.
SATHASIVAM, K. (2003) ‘‘No Other Choice: Pakistan’s Decision to Test the Bomb.’’ In Integrating Cog-
nitive and Rational Theories of Foreign Policy Decision Making, edited by A. Mintz, pp. 55–76. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
TAYLOR-R OBINSON, M., AND S. R EDD (2003) ‘‘Framing the Poliheuristic Theory of Decision: The United
Fruit Company and the 1954 U.S.-Led Coup in Guatemala.’’ In Integrating Cognitive and Rational
Theories of Foreign Policy Decision Making, edited by A. Mintz, pp. 77–100. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Poliheuristic Theory98