Public material in operational code analysis: An
assessment
Bachelor Thesis International Relations and Organisations
Faculty of Social and Behavioral Sciences
Emma Hulsbus
S1628429
Supervisor: F.E. Bakker
Words: 8414
Date: 17-6-2019
1
Introduction
International leaders communicate in a myriad of ways. They give speeches, interviews, hold
press conferences, write letters and participate in meetings. It is not surprising that this
abundance of verbal material has functioned as the way in which international leaders are
studied (Dyson, 2001; Dyson, 2010; He & Feng, 2013; Marfleet, 2000).
Operational code analysis is one of the methods developed to assess international
leaders (George, 1969; Walker, Schafer & Young, 1998; Walker & Schafer, 2006). Leaders’
verbal communication is used to infer their beliefs on the international system (Walker &
Schafer, 2006, p.26). The beliefs of international leaders indicate how the leader views the
international system (George, 1969, p.197). For example, does the leader think that conflict is
an inherent feature of that system? Moreover, what is the best means to obtain one’s goals
internationally? The key assumption behind the method is that what leaders say and how they
say it, is indicative of what they believe (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.26). How often certain
words or phrases are used in their communication on foreign policy issues indicates how the
actor thinks about the international system. Thus, it is assumed that verbal material represents
the psychological content of international leaders (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.26).
However, questions have been asked about the use of public material in operational
code analysis, since what leaders say in public may not match what they say in private
(Dyson & Raleigh, 2014; Renshon, 2009). For example, if an actor uses a public speech act
to control their public image, will this affect the operational code (Renshon, 2009, p.652)?
Moreover, if public speech is used by international leaders to deceive the public, how will the
deceit affect the actor’s operational code (Dyson & Raleigh, p.2; Renshon, 2009, p.658)?
Due to the lack of private material, like transcripts of government meetings with
advisors or letters, many studies in the body of literature on the operational code have made
use of international leaders’ public material (Feng, 2005; He & Feng, 2013; Özdamar &
2
Canbolat, 2017; Robison, 2006). However, the validity of public material in operational code
analysis remains difficult to assess due to the lack of private material. The use of public
material should be evaluated for the international leaders where enough private material is
available. This thesis aims to assess the use of public material by comparing the public
material of Margaret Thatcher with her private material to see whether significant differences
occur between the public and private operational codes. The following research question will
be answered:
What is the effect of using public material on an actor’s operational code?
Theoretical framework
Why is it important to understand the role of international leaders in international relations?
Accurate knowledge of international leaders and their role within international relations is
necessary in order to explain real-world political events better.
The role of individual leaders in international relations has often been overlooked by
grand theories. In neorealism, for example, the anarchic nature of the international system has
been emphasized (Waltz, 1979). Due to anarchy in the international system, security is the
main goal of states. Since foreign policy is aimed at maximizing security, states’ foreign
policy options are constrained. It is assumed that there is no role for individual capabilities
since the leader will always act in a way that maximizes security (Waltz, 1979, p.65).
Moreover, in constructivism, the most important factor in international politics is not
anarchy, but the culture of a state. How a state deals with anarchy in the international system
is determined by its political and institutional culture, and not by the capabilities of an
individual leader (Wendt, 1992).
3
However, some scholars have pointed out that although these approaches were more
accurate in explaining the behavior of states during the cold war, the international system has
changed significantly since then (Hermann & Hagan, 1988, p.125; Walker & Schafer, 2006,
p.4). The international system is increasingly more complex and interdependent, caused by
the rise of new major international players, the increased influence of international
organizations and increasing globalization of market economies. In turn, the increased
complexity has paved the way for interpretation, innovation, misunderstanding and
miscommunication in the international system, which increases the role of international
leaders (Hermann & Hagan, 1988, p.125). International leaders are the decision-makers in
this system, and their individual capabilities influence international events (Byman &
Pollack, 2001). Thus, it is important to assess when and how international leaders influence
international affairs.
If an actor-centric approach is continuously left out of international relations, it will
become more and more difficult to explain international events properly. Since international
relations is grounded in individual and group decision-making, which are social and
psychological processes, it is extremely important to develop approaches that grasp these
processes, and the role of political leaders within these processes (Hudson, 2005, p.1). In
order for international relations to not fail as a discipline, actor-centered theories that grasp
the social and psychological processes behind individual and group decision-making must be
developed (Hudson, 2005). By looking at international events through a domestic lens, we
will be able to grasp how the international system is influenced by local considerations,
which, in turn, enables us to explain international political events more accurately (Bueno De
Mesquita, 2002, p.7). Thus, it is important that the methods developed to grasp the role of
international leaders can contribute to our understanding of international affairs.
4
The operational code has been used to explain foreign policy decisions by leaders
(Dyson, 2010; He & Feng, 2013; Schafer & Walker, 2006). The fundamental assumption
behind the method is that the verbal communication of international leaders is representative
of their psychological content (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p. 26). Verbal communication
allows us to infer the beliefs of leaders. Consequently, those beliefs can be used to explain
foreign policy decisions of international leaders.
Some scholars have raised questions about the use of public material in operational
code (Dyson & Raleigh, 2014; Renshon, 2009; Schafer, 2000). International leaders’ public
speech may not match their private speech. For example, leaders might use public speech in
order to employ impression management tactics (Renshon, 2009, p.652). Impression
management refers to attempts to control one’s public image (Tetlock & Manstead, 1985,
p.62). Moreover, leaders may use public speech acts to deceive the public. In short, public
speech may be used for strategic purposes.
If it is the case that public speech is used for strategic purposes, then it might be that
public material is not helpful in assessing the beliefs of international leaders (Dyson &
Raleigh, 2014, p.2; Schafer, 2000, p.514; Tetlock & Manstead, 1985). In turn, the operational
code’s ability to explain foreign policy decisions would be affected, since it would be
uncertain which type of material is better suited for operational code analysis. The
contribution of operational code analysis towards our understanding of the role of the beliefs
of international leaders would be limited if it is uncertain which type of material better grasps
an actor’s operational code.
Moreover, due to the limited availability of private material of international leaders,
operational code analysis has depended on public material (He & Feng, 2013; Feng, 2005;
Özdamar & Canbolat, 2017; Robison, 2006). Past contributions of operational code towards
5
the knowledge of international leaders would be called into question if public material turned
out to be invalid.
Consequently, it is important that the use of public material in operational code
analysis is evaluated. The question of whether public material is valid in operational code
analysis ultimately remains an empirical question (Dyson & Raleigh, 2014, p.2), since the use
of public material can only be evaluated by comparing public speech acts with private speech
acts in order to assess whether significant differences occur. This thesis will compare
Margaret Thatcher’s public speech acts with her private speech acts in order to evaluate the
use of different material will result in significantly different operational codes.
Private material does not represent the ‘true’ beliefs of international leaders. It is still
possible that leaders use private material for strategic purposes (Dyson & Raleigh, 2014, p.6).
Leaders can still control their social image towards their advisors or colleagues or deceive
colleagues. If one would want obtain the true beliefs of international leaders, then intimate
material might be the best material to infer these beliefs from (Dyson & Raleigh, 2014, p.6).
Examples of intimate material are autobiographical material, letters to close family and
friends and diary entries.
However, since the operational code is aimed at explaining foreign policy decisions
and international events (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.4), I think it is not as relevant to look at
intimate material since it does not reflect the international leader within their role as leader.
Ultimately, foreign policy decisions are made by international leaders in their role as leader.
In this thesis, public material will refer to verbal communication of leaders that is
expressed in public and are publicly accessible, such as speeches, press conferences and
interviews. Public material is spoken or written by leaders from their role as leaders, not as
private individual. Examples of public material are speeches, interviews and press
conferences.
6
Private material refers to material that was not publicly accessible at the time and are
characterized as behind-the-scenes material. Since this thesis aims to assess the public
material of international leaders in their role as leaders, and not as leaders as private
individuals, the private material will not refer to diaries or personal letters. Examples of
private material are letters sent as leader, transcripts of meetings with advisors, government
officials and aides, and transcripts from telephone calls. With this operationalization, earlier
research on the use of public material in operational code analysis is followed (Renshon,
2009; Dyson & Raleigh, 2014).
The operational code assesses the belief system of an actor about the fundamental nature of
the international system (George, 1969, p.197). For example, what does an actor believe
about conflict in the international system? Does the actor think that conflict is inherent in the
international system? Moreover, what does the actor believe is the best strategy to realize his
political goals?
The beliefs of leaders are important when attempting to understand foreign affairs
better, since a beliefs system guides an actor’s decision-making (Holsti, 1962, p.244). On the
one hand, the belief system contains the actor’s perceptions of reality, and on the other hand,
the belief system contains the actor’s values, his ideas of what should be (Holsti, 1962,
p.245). The combination of these two parts of the belief system guides the actor’s decision-
making (p.245). Thus, what happens in international relations is based on how international
leaders view other states and the international system (George, 1969, p.190). Consequently, it
is relevant to look at the belief systems of international leaders, since it can explain foreign
policy decisions by international leaders and increase our understanding of their decision-
making (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.48).
7
However, the belief system of an actor is not the only determinant in decision-
making. It would be an oversimplification of international relations to state that an actor’s
belief system is the only relevant factor in decision-making. Many factors are at play
simultaneously, and an actor’s belief system is one of those factors (Dyson & Raleigh, 2014,
p.6; Schafer, 2000, p.513). Although the operational code provides insight on how the actor
in question might approach a political problem, it does not provide a fixed rulebook for how
an actor will act (George, 1969, p.190).
George (1969) formulated 10 questions whose answers reflect an actor’s belief
system. The beliefs can be found in table 1. George’s questions are divided in philosophical
beliefs and instrumental beliefs (George, 1969, p.199). An actors’ philosophical beliefs refer
to his assumptions about the nature of the political system, political conflict, political
opponents, and control on the course of events (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.4). The
instrumental beliefs reflect the beliefs the actor has about instruments and tools at hand, and
the best course of action to obtain one’s goals (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.4)
The answers to these questions are attained by analyzing the verbal communication of
an actor (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.26). Consequently, the operational code is an at-a-
distance method since it does not rely on direct or experimental psychological tests, but rather
on indirect data to analyze its subjects (Schafer, 2013, p.1).
There are a number of reasons why at-a-distance methodology is necessary to analyze
political leaders. First, international leaders are not directly accessible test-subjects due to
their busy schedules and wariness of clinical poking (Hafner-Burton, Hughes & Victor, 2013,
p. 368; Schafer, 2013, p.3). However, international leaders speak in public in a variety of
ways, which makes the data for the analysis of political leaders easily obtainable
8
Table 1: The Philosophical Beliefs in an Operational Code
P-1. What is the “essential” nature of political life? Is the political universe essentially one of
harmony or of conflict? What is the fundamental character of one’s political opponents?
P-2. What are the prospects for the eventual realization of one’s fundamental values and
aspirations? Can one be optimistic, or must one be pessimistic on this score; and in what
respects the one and/or the other?
P-3. Is the political future predictable? In what sense and to what extent?
P-4. How much “control” or “mastery” can one have over historical development? What is
one’s role in “moving” or “shaping” history in the desired direction
P-5. What is the role of “chance” in human affairs and in historical development?
The Instrumental Beliefs in an Operational Code
I-1. What is the best approach for selecting goals or objectives for political action?
I-2. How are the goals of action pursued most effectively?
I-3. How are the risks of political action calculated, controlled and accepted?
I-4. What is the best “timing” of action to advance one’s interests?
I-5. What is the utility and role of different means for advancing one’s interests?
Table 1. Source: Walker & Schafer (2006, p.8)
Secondly, verbal behavior serves as a good basis for inferring psychological content, since
the way an individual speaks tells us something about his or her state of mind (Schafer, 2013,
p.3). Thirdly, verbal behavior allows for systematic content analysis. Researches may look
for certain patters of words that allow for the inferring of psychological content. How often
certain words are used and what kind of connotations those words carry tells us about the
subject’s state of mind (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.26).
Thus, the key assumption behind the operational code is that psychological content
can be inferred from verbal behavior (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.26). How a leader speaks
about a certain foreign policy issue or political opponent is indicative of their beliefs about
that issue or opponent (p.26). Consequently, by analyzing the content of verbal
communication like speeches, interviews, press conferences or letters, the beliefs of leaders
can be inferred. All sorts of verbal communications can be used for operational code analysis,
9
like speeches, interviews, press conferences, and letters. However, in order for the
operational code to be representative of the beliefs of the actor’s beliefs on the international
system, all material must be on the subject of foreign policy (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.44).
In contemporary operational code analysis, the Verbs in Context System (VICS) is
used to attain the beliefs of international leaders from verbal communication (Feng, 2005;
Walker, Schafer & Young, 1998; Yang, Keller & Molnar, 2017). VICS is a content analysis
scheme that provides quantitative variables for each philosophical and instrumental belief by
analyzing the verbs and their context (Walker, Schafer & Young, 1998). For example, the
verbs praise signifies a different message about state action than attack. Variables for each
belief are attained based on aggregated coded verbs. How high or low a leader scores on the
index for each belief, is indicative of their beliefs about the international system. A complete
overview of the beliefs and corresponding index can be found in appendix A.
The resulting quantitative variables enable political scientists to make useful
comparisons across time, countries, political system, belief change of an actor and determine
the effects of different types of material (Renshon, 2008; Renshon, 2009; Walker & Schafer,
2006, p.27; Schafer, 2013, p.2).
Not every speech act is suitable for analysis. Walker & Schafer (2006) have
formulated a few criteria that speech acts must meet in order to be useful in operational code
analysis. First, the subject of speech acts must be on foreign policy in order to obtain the
beliefs of international leaders (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.44). Secondly, the speech acts
must contain 20 codable verbs in order for the speech act to produce meaningful values for
each belief (p.44). Third, the speech act must be verbal communication from the leader
himself. All verbal communication must be spoken or written by the actor in question
(Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.46).
10
One might argue that my operationalization of public material does include ‘prepared’
material, which has not been written by the actor itself, but rather by speech writers. Using
prepared materials would be at odds with Walker & Schafer’s (2006) requirement that the
leader himself is the author of the material used (p.46). Prepared material might affect the
operational code, since not all material will represent the psychological content of Margaret
Thatcher, but rather her speechwriters (Schafer & Crichlow, 2000; Walker & Schafer, 2006,
p.47). Consequently, if any significant differences between public and private material are
found, it is possible that that differences occurred because prepared material has affected the
operational code. Due to the inclusion of prepared material, the public operational code will
not grasp Thatcher’s psychological content and cannot be accurately compared with a private
operational code.
However, I do not think that using prepared materials is a problem in the case of
Margaret Thatcher. Thatcher herself was heavily involved in the writing of her speeches.
John ‘O Sullivan, her speech writer during her time in office, stated that Thatcher would
comment on every single draft of the speech. Usually about five drafts would be drawn up
before the final Thatcher speech was ready because she would meticulously analyze every
sentence of the speech (‘O Sullivan, 2013). In Thatcher’s case, the use of speech writers
would not affect the prepared material of Margaret Thatcher, since she was heavily involved
in the process itself. The speeches can be said to represent her psychological content (Dille,
2000, p.538).
In the past, two studies have assessed the use of public material in operational code analysis
by comparing public with private material.
Renshon (2009) assessed the use of public material in operational code analysis by
comparing public and private material of John F. Kennedy. Renshon’s rationale for
11
investigating the use of public material was the problem posed by impression management
(p.652). Impression management is a strategy employed by an actor to influence their public
image (Tetlock & Manstead, 1985). If verbal communication is used for strategic purposes
like impression management, then the material might not be useful for assessing the
psychological characteristics of leaders (Tetlock & Manstead, 1985). With public material,
Renshon referred to a collection of speeches and opening remarks of news conferences, while
the private material consisted of transcripts of policy meetings with advisors (p.655).
The sample frame for public and private material was limited to material from June 1
to September 1, 1962 (Renshon, 2009, p.655). The motivation for this choice was to remove
‘potentially confounding elements’ from the data (p.652). Potentially confounding elements
are elements that result in a larger divergence from public and private material than normal
(p.652). For example, using public data from different time frame than the private data, or
using material from crisis situations, since Renshon assumed that public and private material
differ in those situations. Thus, Renshon selected a sample frame where no crises occurred
(p.655). The public side of the data had a sample size of 6, and the private side of the data
had a sample size of 4 (p.657).
After the material was collected, Renshon (2009) used the VICS content analysis
system to analyze both the public and private material (p.654). The coding process was
carried out by the ProfilerPlus website (profilerplus.org), an automated content analysis
software. The resulting public and private operational codes were compared with a two-tailed
Student’s t-Test (p.657).
Renshon (2009) concluded that both the private and public operational code give very
similar beliefs for president Kennedy (p.657). Both operational codes indicate that Kennedy
is optimistic about the nature of the international system and optimistic about realizing his
political goals. Moreover, Kennedy displays low confidence in the predictability of
12
international events, and believes he has low control over international events. Cooperation is
Kenney’s preferred strategy. Furthremore, Kennedy displayed a low tolerance for risk.
Additionally, he displayed a medium level of flexibility in shifting between cooperation and
conflict and between words and deeds (p. 657). Statistical analysis did not show significant
differences for any belief at p < .05 (p. 657). Only one belief, P-3, is statistically significant at
p < .1. Kennedy displayed a very low predictability of the political future in public, and a low
predictability in private (p.656).
Renshon (2009) concludes that the operational codes are strikingly similar in both
public and private contexts, which provides some conformation of the validity of the use of
public material in operational code analysis (p.658). The small but significant belief change
in philosophical belief P-3 is dismissed due to its small magnitude and significance of p < .1.
These findings enable scholars working within the method of operational code analysis to
proceed with greater confidence in the method (p.658). Furthermore, Renshon suggests that
further research is needed to assess whether his findings hold in crisis situations and times of
war (p.658).
However, Renshon’s (2009) study is not without problems. First, what Renshon
means by crisis situation is unclear. Consequently, it is uncertain under what conditions his
conclusions about the use of public speech hold up. What constitutes a crisis event? How
should these crisis situations be taken into account when selecting data for operational code
analysis?
Secondly, Renshon’s (2009, p.652) exclusion of ‘potentially confounding elements’
from the public data by selecting a small sample frame, free of crisis situations, makes his
findings hard to generalize. Various studies within operational code analysis often include
material from larger time periods than Renshon’s three months. For example, the sample
frames are often longer than a year (Dyson & Raleigh, 2014; Özdamar & Canbolat, 2017;
13
Schafer & Crichlow, 2000; Walker, Schafer & Young, 1998). It is plausible that in these
sample frame’s, events have been included that Renshon would have defined as a crisis
situation. How does the use of public material affect the operational code of an actor when
such events are included? Although Renshon himself argues that his findings assert the
validity of the use of public speech in operational code analysis (p.658), it remains unclear
how public speech affects an actor’s operational code when a larger sample frame is included
and when crisis situation have occurred in the sample frame.
In addition, Dyson & Raleigh (2014) have looked into the validity of the use of public
material in at-a-distance methods. If public speech is manipulative and strategic, and if
leaders’ decisions are driven by the private sphere, is public material of value (p.2)? Dyson &
Raleigh asked the question whether the public speech acts of dictators of closed regimes were
representative of their beliefs by looking at the public and private speech acts of Saddam
Hussein. The issue of whether we can trust what dictators say has always been subject of
discussion, since closed regimes offer us little information on private deliberations (p.2).
Dyson & Raleigh (2014) used both the Leadership Trait Analysis (LTA) by Margaret
Hermann (1980, 2005) and the operational code to test whether private beliefs could be
inferred from public material. LTA is an at-a-distance method designed to measure the
personality traits of international leaders (Hermann, 1980, 2005). However, Dyson & Raleigh
did not use both methods strictly, but adopted key variables from both methods that were
proven to be useful in explaining foreign policy behavior (p.3). From the operational code,
three variables were adopted: image of other (P-1), image of self (I-1), and belief in ability to
control events (P-4). From the LTA, Dyson & Raleigh adopted the variable conceptual
complexity, which refers to the sophistication of an actor’s cognition (p.3).
For public material, the study used Hussein’s speeches on international relations,
ranging from 1977 to 2000. These speeches have resulted in 330,000 words included in
14
analysis. (Dyson & Raleigh, 2014, p.3). The private material of Saddam Hussein were
transcripts of his conversations and phone calls with advisors, also ranging from the years
1977 to 2000. Around 58.000 words of private material was collected. Public and private
material was translated into English, and relates to various foreign policy issues (p.3).
After the data was collected, the indices for each variable were calculated using the
automatic content analysis software provided by the ProfilerPlus website (profilerplus.org).
Dyson & Raleigh (2014) distinguished between Saddam’s worldview overall, which included
material on all various foreign policy issues, and specific views on the US, Iran and Israel.
The public and private scores were thus compared in four categories: Saddam’s general
worldview, views towards the US, towards Israel, and towards Iran (p.4).
Overall, Dyson & Raleigh (2014) conclude that the private and public scores for each
variable show a similar actor, except for conceptual complexity (p. 5). In public, Saddam
displayed significantly less conceptual complexity than in private. However, in public and in
private Saddam showed the same image of other. Saddam’s image of self did differ a little in
public (0.35) compared to private data (0.26), as was the case with the control over historical
events, with a score of 0.64 in public and 0.55 in private (p.5).
Saddam’s traits concerning the US, Iran and Israel show differences between public
and private data. The beliefs are similar to Saddam’s overall views, but in private he
perceived a lower ability to influence events towards Israel than he displayed in public.
Moreover, he described the US as more hostile in public than in private, and displayed much
higher conceptual complexity in public than in private. Moreover, when talking about the US,
he portrayed Iraq’s actions as much less hostile than in private. Dyson & Raleigh conclude
that these differences point to impression management tactics (p.4).
According to Dyson & Raleigh, the results contribute towards the validity of the use
of public material in operational code analysis. The beliefs revealed in public material match
15
those expressed in private (p.5). However, the study offers some evidence for the existence of
impression management due to the difference in conceptual complexity in private and public
and differences on specific foreign policy issues (p.6).
However, the conclusions of Dyson & Raleigh (2014) are only applicable to three
operational code beliefs. Not all operational code beliefs have been measured in this study.
Instead, three key variables have been used by Dyson & Raleigh (2014, p.3). However, it is
possible that significant differences could have occurred in the beliefs that have not been
measured. Knowing whether these differences have occurred or not is important in assessing
the validity of public material in operational code analysis. Consequently, he study does not
contribute entirely to the validity of public material in operational code analysis.
Moreover, it is debatable whether Dyson & Raleigh’s (2014) positive conclusions are
warranted. Out of the 16 possible categories where public and private material could have
diverted, five categories displayed significant differences (p.5-6). Dyson & Raleigh (2014)
argue that the differences found in Saddam’s views towards the US, Isreal and Iran are not
completely different from Saddam’s general worldview. The beliefs remain in the same
categories, and differ only in degree. However, most of the differences are of a large degree.
For example, Saddam’s image of self towards the US is measured at 0.05 in private and 0.4
in public. Moreover, Saddam’s conceptual complexity in his views towards the US is
measured at 0.45 in public, and at 0.65 in private. These findings also suggest that private
material may be better suited for operational code analysis.
The body of literature on public and private material of international leaders has its
limitations. Although Renshon (2009) has contributed to the validity of pubic material, it
remains unclear how the inclusions of material on crisis situations affects an actor’s
operational code. Moreover, Dyson & Raleigh (2014) have not looked into the use of public
16
material for all operational code beliefs. Consequently, the limited body of literature on the
use of public material in operational code analysis emphasizes the need for further research
into this issue. In turn, the importance of this thesis’ research question is underlined.
Theoretical expectations
I do not expect to find significant differences between Thatcher’s public and private
operational codes.
First, Walker & Schafer (2006) have argued that, although leaders are deceptive in
certain speech acts, it would not skew the resulting operational code (p.47). I concur with
Walker & Schafer’s view. If a leader is intentionally deceptive in their speech acts, the actor
would only need to change a few verbs in order to change the perception of the public (p.47).
The few verbs that would be changed by the international leader would not result in changes
in the operational code, since the operational code is based on a much greater number of
utterances. Many of those utterances are unaffected by impression management or deception,
and would not influence the VICS analysis. Deception or impression management would not
affect our ability to infer beliefs of leaders drawing from public material (Walker & Schafer,
2006, p.47).
Moreover, Walker & Schafer (2006) point towards the ‘locking-in’ effect of public
speech (p.47). International leaders are constrained by their public speech, because they can
be accused of lying if their actions do not match their speech. Thus, international leaders’
public behavior is constrained by their public image (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.47). Their
public actions will match their beliefs (Renshon, 2009, p.652).
17
Moreover, Renshon (2009) has contributed somewhat to the validity of the use of
public material in operational code analysis. He found that Kennedy’s public and private
image were strikingly similar in both the public and private context.
Methodology
In order to assess the validity of the use of public material in operational code analysis, a
comparison must be made between an operational code based on public material and one
based on private material. For both the public and private operational code, the selected
material will be analyzed by applicating the VICS content analysis scheme. The operational
codes will be compared by means of an independent samples t-test.
The difficulty in assessing the use of public material is the limited availability of
private material of international leaders, like transcripts of meetings with advisors, letters or
other types of communication with colleagues or aides. This type of behind-the-scenes
material is oftentimes not released until years after the fact, if it is released at all (Renshon,
2009, p.652). However, there are some leaders where this type of material has been made
available. One example is Margaret Thatcher, Britain’s prime minister from 1979 – 1990.
The British government keeps extensive records of all forms of communication within the
government. Moreover, Margaret Thatcher kept records of all files that passed her desk
during her premiership. Every year, declassified documents are released to the public and
transferred to various national archives.
The Margaret Thatcher archive (www.margaretthatcher.org/archive) has collected all
documents related to Margaret Thatcher and has published them online. The Margaret
Thatcher archive contains a vast collection of declassified government files during Thatcher’s
time in office, including letters sent to her international colleagues, transcripts of phone calls
18
with her colleagues, notes of meetings with advisors and policy documents. Moreover, the
archive has collected all of Thatcher’s public statements, like speeches, interviews and press
conferences. The Margaret Thatcher archive offers an enormous source of material that can
be the subject of operational code analysis. Consequently, the readily available public and
private material assures that Thatcher is an interesting subject of analysis to assess the
validity of the use of public material in operational code analysis.
This thesis aims to construct a general operational code of Margaret Thatcher on both
the public and private side. Thus, no distinction will be made between the various foreign
policy issues that marked Thatcher’s time in office. All speech acts, whether it be on
East/West relations, the invasion of Afghanistan, the negotiation of Hong Kong or apartheid
in South-Africa, will be included in public or private material.
The Margaret Thatcher archive contains an immense amount of her public speech acts. It was
not within the scope of this thesis to include each suitable speech act in analysis. Instead, a
suitable selection was made of public material from the Margaret Thatcher archive.
For each entry in the archive, the various topics of each speech acts are marked up.
This proved very useful when searching the archive, since speech acts on foreign policy
could be found easily. All public speech acts from Thatcher’s time in office on foreign policy
could be found by using the search function of the archive. The following search command
was entered in the archive’s search function:
- Time period: ‘1979 – 90: Prime Minister’
- Source type: ‘Speeches’ and ‘Press’
- Subject: ‘Foreign Policy (general discussion)’
The search command resulted in nearly 300 speech acts, far too much for all of them to be
included in analysis. Consequently, two speech acts per year were chosen, one from June 15th
19
and one from December 15th. Maintaining an interval of six months between data points
guarantees that a foreign policy issue that dominated one particular point in time does not
disproportionally affect the operational code. Moreover, the selection of speech acts by their
date ensures that the speech acts are chosen randomly, which excludes the possibility of bias
in the data.
However, some speech act from these dates were not suitable for analysis since the
criterion of length were not met (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.44). Moreover, not every June
15th and December 15th resulted in a speech act. If there was no speech act of that date, or the
speech act was not suitable, a suitable speech act from the nearest date was selected.
A complete overview of used public material can be found in appendix B.
On the private side, collecting the data was not as straightforward. First, the archive was
browsed to orientate on the available types of private material on foreign policy.
Overall, notes of government meetings were not suitable for analysis. The British
government did not make transcripts of meetings, but took minutes of what was said. The
comments of Margaret Thatcher were summarized, and did not represent what she actually
said in the meeting. Thus, government notes were excluded from analysis, since it did not
meet Walker & Schafer’s (2006) requirement of authorship (p.46).
However, a valuable source of material proved to be her correspondence with other
heads of state. The correspondence was often in the form of letters, telegrams and transcripts
of phone calls. Especially her written correspondence with President Carter and Reagan
proved useful. These letters covered various foreign policy issues and often contained enough
codable verbs to meet the cut-off point of 20 coded verbs (Walker & Schafer, 2006, p.44).
Moreover, some private speeches were found in the archive that were given at private
government meetings by Thatcher that were suitable for analysis due to them being delivered
20
behind the scenes. Thus, the private material contains letters, telegrams and transcripts of
phone calls, and speeches at private government events. The following search command was
used to find these speech acts:
- Time period: ‘1979 – 90: Prime Minister’
- Source type: ‘Archive’
- Subject: ‘Foreign Policy (general discussion)’
- Key words: ‘MT letter’, ‘telegram’, ‘phone call’, ‘speech’
After discarding the speech acts that did not contain 20 coded verbs, 23 private speech acts
were selected. A complete overview of private material can be found in appendix B.
Both the public and private sides covered enough different foreign policy issues to be
able to make a general operational code of Thatcher’s beliefs.
After all the material was selected, the content analysis was carried out by applicating the
VICS coding scheme. The scheme assesses the intensity and direction of the spoken verbs
(Walker, Schafer & Young, 1998, p.183). For example, when a leader says ‘Russia invaded
Ukraine’ or ‘we praise Russia for its intervention in Ukraine’, the verbs invade and praise
signify very different messages about the state. Each verb can be coded on the following
scale: Punish (-3), Threaten (-2), Oppose (-1), Support (+1), Promise (+2), and Reward (+3).
In addition, the verbs are coded for direction, i.e. the actor is talking about themselves or the
other (p.183). Consequently, each sentence can be scored for intensity and direction, resulting
in a score of, for example, -3 other or +3 self.
Based on these coded verbs, the variables for each belief can be calculated (Walker,
Schafer & Young, 1998). Each belief is calculated differently, but an example is useful. For
belief P-1, the corresponding variable can be calculated by detracting the percentage of
negative other attributions from the percentage of positive other attributions (Walker, Schafer
21
& Young, 1998, p. 178). For some beliefs, the index ranges from 0 to 1, while for others, the
index ranges from -1 to +1. A complete overview of the index for each belief can be found in
appendix A.
ProfilerPlus v. 7.3.2 (https://profilerplus.org) is used to analyze both the public and
private phase. ProfilerPlus is an automatic coding program that applies the content analysis
scheme to the data. ProfilerPlus analyzes the verbs for direction and intensity. The indices for
each belief are calculated on the basis of the ProfilerPlus output as prescribed by Walker,
Schafer & Young (1998). The indices are compared on the basis of an independent samples t-
test. A students t-test is used. If Levene’s test indicates violated test assumptions, a Welch t-
test is used instead.
Analysis
How does using public material affect an actor’s operational code? Table 2 shows the results
from statistical analysis. The left column displays Thatcher’s operational code based on
public material, and the right column indicates the operational code based on private material,
with t-statistics in brackets. Statistically significant differences are highlighted.
Whether public or private material was utilized did not result in a significant
difference in most philosophical beliefs. Both operational codes convey Thatcher’s belief that
the political universe is somewhat friendly (P-1). Moreover, both operational codes show
Thatcher’s somewhat optimistic attitude towards the realization of political values (P-2), the
low control over historical development (P-4) and the high role of chance in the political
universe (P-5).
22
Table 2: Operational Code of Margaret Thatcher
Public material
(N=22)
Private material
(N=23)
P-1 Nature of Political Universe .287 .326
(.509)
P-2 Realization of Political
Values
.133 .124
(-.145)
P-3 Predictability of Political
Future
.124 .171
(2.447)*
P-4 Control over Historical
Development
.250 .279
(.915)
P-5 Role of Chance .959 .953
(-.585)
I-1 Strategic Approach to Goals .619 .682
(.677)
I-2 Tactical Pursuit of Goals .261 .280
(.336)
I-3 Risk Orientation .360 .523
(2.228)*
I-4 Timing of Action
I-4a Cooperation/Conflict .850 .802
(-1.255)
I-4b Words/Deeds .871 .801
(-2.188)*
I-5 Utility of Means
I-5a Reward .169 .112
(-1.585)
I-5b Promise .008 .036
(2.220)*
I-5c Appeal .633 .694
(1.068)
I-5d Oppose .100 .097
(-.025)
I-5e Threaten .007 .017
(.868)
I-5f Punish .088 .0.043
(-1.640)
T-statistics are indicated in brackets. Significant results are bold: * p ≤ .05, **p ≤ .01, *** p
≤ .001
23
However, a significant difference can be found in Thatcher’s belief in the
predictability of the political future (P-3). In private material, Thatcher conveys a higher
belief in a predictable political future than in private. However, both in public and in private,
Thatcher’s belief in the predictability of the political future is classified as low. Thus, the
change is not of a large magnitude.
As for the instrumental beliefs, both operational codes display her cooperative
strategies (I-1), her somewhat cooperative intensity of tactics (I-2), and her high flexibility
between employing cooperative and conflictual strategies is maintained by Thatcher (I-4a).
However, some significant differences occurred in Thatcher’s instrumental beliefs. In
private, Thatcher displays significantly less flexibility in shifting between verbal and
operational tactics than in public (I-4b). Nevertheless, both indices of belief I-4b still indicate
a high flexibility of tactics. Furthermore, Thatcher, in private, displayed a greater preference
for utility of means ‘promise’ than in public (I-5b). However, the difference between the
utility of means in public and private is a minimal difference. Both in public and in private,
the preference for utility of means ‘promise’ is still classified as very low.
However, the most striking difference between the public and private operational
code is Thatcher’s risk orientation (I-3). In public, Thatcher has a low risk orientation, but in
private, her risk orientation is significantly higher and is thus classified as ‘medium’.
Discussion
This thesis found four significant differences between the public and private operational code
of Margaret Thatcher. Three of those changes were of a small magnitude, but Thatcher’s risk
orientation was much lower in public than in private.
24
Renshon (2009) found no significant differences in Kennedy’s public and private
operational codes, except for Kennedy’s belief in the predictability of the political future
(p.657). That difference, however, was of a very small magnitude. According to Renshon, his
findings contribute to the validity of using public material in operational code analysis
(p.658). Public material can be used with confidence in operational code analysis (p.658).
However, this thesis did find some significant differences, which indicates that when
using a longer sample frame, public material might not always be accurate material for
inferring the beliefs of leaders from. Especially an actor’s risk orientation may not be
represented well in public material. The findings of this thesis do suggest that using public
material might affect an actor’s risk orientation.
Dyson & Raleigh (2014) conclude that their study has contributed to the validity of
the use of public material due to the little differences in Saddam’s public and private
worldview (p.5). When focusing on specific topics, they did find evidence of impression
management (p.5). However, this thesis has only looked into Thatcher’s general worldview.
In the general worldview, differences can be found between her public and private
operational code. This indicates that beliefs of leaders cannot always be accurately inferred
from public material, contrary to what Dyson & Raleigh (2014) themselves conclude.
Moreover, this thesis has found some evidence for impression management due to the large
difference between Thatcher’s public and private risk orientation, corresponding with Dyson
& Raleigh ‘s (2014) conclusion.
However, this thesis has not distinguished between the various different foreign
policy topics, like Dyson & Raleigh (2014) have. Their evidence of impression management
was mostly found when distinguishing between Saddam’s views of the US, Israel and Iran. If
this thesis would have distinguished between Thatcher’s general worldview and, for example,
25
views of the Soviet-Union, more evidence for impression management might have been
found.
It seems that Walker & Schafer (2006) theory of the ‘locking-in’ effect of public
speech acts is incorrect. It does seem like international leaders are not as constrained by their
public speech acts as Walker & Schafer have argued (p.47). The difference between Thatcher
public and private risk orientation does demonstrate that, in private, Thatcher was more
willing to take risks than she portrayed in public. Moreover, the findings of this thesis suggest
that Walker & Schafer’s (2006) suggestion that the strategic use of public speech act does not
affect the VICS analysis, is not correct. It seems that when public speech acts are used for
strategic purposes, it can affect the operational code of an actor, and sway the VICS analysis.
However, this thesis has only looked into the differences in public and private
material for one leader. It is plausible that, when other international leaders are studied on the
differences between public and private material, no significant differences are found. These
findings would implicate that the differences found in this thesis are the result of Thatcher as
a leader, and not of private material being used strategically. Thus, further research on the
validity of public material in operational code analysis for other international leaders should
be conducted.
Conclusion
The main concern of this thesis was to evaluate the validity of the use of public material in
operational code analysis. The analysis was carried out by comparing an operational code of
Margaret Thatcher based on public material with one based on private material. The results
indicate that, overall, public material does not always represent an actor’s beliefs accurately.
Thatcher’s beliefs proved to be more difficult to grasp, since four beliefs differed
26
significantly when the operational code was based on private material. Although three of the
four significant differences were of a small magnitude, Thatcher’s risk orientation in public
was much lower than in private.
Why is the difference between public and private material attributed to public
material, and not private material? It is possible that actor’s engage in deception or
impression management in private, behind-the-scenes material too (Dyson & Raleigh, 2014,
p.6). Thus, we cannot say that an actor’s ‘true’ beliefs are reflected in either public or private
material. However, it does seem more plausible that international leaders speak more freely
on foreign affairs in private, with advisors and colleagues, than in public. Consequently,
private material is most likely a closer reflection of an actor’s true beliefs than public material
is. Thus, it is very plausible that the private material represents the beliefs of international
leaders better, since the actor speaks more freely on matters than in public.
The public and private operational codes of Thatcher did not show significant
differences for most beliefs. Especially in Thatcher’s philosophical beliefs, no significant
differences were found except for the predictability of the political future. In her instrumental
beliefs, more significant differences were found, but most of a very small magnitude.
However, the significance of the difference between Thatcher’s public and private risk
orientation should not be minimized. In public, Thatcher displayed a low risk orientation, but
in private, it seems she was far more risk orientated.
Public speech being used strategically can serve as an explanation for the differences
between beliefs. It is possible that Thatcher’s public speech acts were uttered for strategic
purposes like deceit or impression management tactics. Consequently, her psychological
content was not represented well (Tetlock & Manstead, 1985). For example, the findings
indicate that Thatcher wanted to appear very flexible in shifting between verbal or
operational tactics, yet risk averse and aware of the unpredictability of the international
27
system. In private, however, she was more risk acceptant because she believed the
international system to be more predictable, and thus preferred verbal tactics over taking
action. Thus, the results indicate that if public material may disproportionally affect an
actor’s operational code due to the strategic use of public material.
However, the body of literature on impression management tactics in politics is very
limited. Many studies are related to the employment of impression management tactics in
elections (De Landtsheer, de Vries & Vertessen, 2008; Jackson & Lilleker, 2011), and not on
the employment of impression management tactics by political leaders and how those affect
our ability to infer beliefs. Thus, it is useful to look into the employment of impression
management strategies by international leaders in relation to the operational code. A
suggestion is to use Thatcher for this research due to the differences between public and
private material found in this thesis. When focusing on, for example Thatcher’s views on the
Soviet-Union, do differences occur in her public and private views? If so, can we see
evidence of decision-making on the deployment of impression management tactics in private
material?
Deceit is also named as a possible strategic use of public material, however, its
relation with impression management remains unclear. When a leader employs impression
management tactics, does it fall under deceit? Or when a leader is purposefully deceiving the
public, does this count as the employment of impression management tactics? Thus, more
research into deceit the influence on deceit by international leaders, and its influence on the
operational code, should be conducted.
This thesis does not disprove the use of public material in operational code analysis entirely.
Some differences were found in the beliefs of Thatcher based on public or private material.
However, a large disparity between public and private material was only found in Thatcher’s
28
risk orientation. The findings call into question the validity of using public material in
operational code analysis because the findings do suggest that an actor’s risk orientation
cannot always be accurately inferred from public material.
However, I recommend that further research is conducted to evaluate the use of public
material for more international leaders for whom enough private material is available. It is
possible that the difference found between public and private material is the result of
Thatcher as a person, but this can only be assessed by comparing these findings with other
international leaders. If it is the case that public material does not always accurately represent
the beliefs of international leaders, it is important to know under what conditions the use of
public material is not valid and how its invalidity can be avoided.
This research is highly relevant for operational code analysis, since the method has
depended on public material (He & Feng, 2013; Feng, 2005; Özdamar & Canbolat, 2017;
Robson, 2006). In order for the operational code to contribute to our knowledge of
international leaders and our understanding of international relations as a whole, it is
important to know whether public material generally reflects the beliefs of international
leaders. Although the findings of this thesis are not enough to fully assess whether public
material is valid or invalid in operational code analysis, it does suggest that public material is
not always accurate for inferring the beliefs of international leaders. Consequently, the
importance of more research into this issue and into the employment of deceit and impression
management strategies by international leaders is emphasized.
In sum, the findings of this thesis suggest that public material does not always
represent the psychological content of international leaders due to public material being used
for strategic purposes like impression management or deceit. Consequently, public material
that have been used for strategic purposes may affect the operational code of an actor in such
a way that not all beliefs can be accurately inferred from public material.
29
Bibliography
Bueno De Mesquita, B. (2002). Domestic politics and international relations. International
Studies Quarterly, 46(1), 1–9. doi:10.1111/1468-2478.00220
Byman, D.L. & Pollack, K. M. (2001). Let us now praise great men: Bringing the statesman
back in. International Security, 25(4), 107-146. doi:10.1162/01622880151091916
De Landtsheer, C., De Vries, P. & Vertessen, D. (2008). Political impression management:
How metaphors, sound bits, appearance effectiveness and personality traits can win
elections. Journal of Political Marketing, 7(3-4), 271-238.
doi:10.1080/15377850802005083
Dille, B. (2000). The prepared and spontaneous remarks of presidents Reagan and Bush: A
validity comparison for at-a-distance measurements. Political Psychology, 21(3), 573-
585. doi:10.1111/0162-895X.00205
Dyson, S.B. (2001). Drawing policy implications from the 'operational code' of a 'new'
political actor: Russian president Vladimir Putin. Policy Sciences, 34(3-4), 329-346.
doi:10.1023/A:1012627604580
Dyson, S.B. (2010). George W. Bush, the surge and presidential leadership. Political Science
Quarterly, 125(4), 557-585. doi:10.1002/j.1538-165X.2010.tb00685.x
30
Dyson, S.B. & Raleigh, A.L. (2014). Public and private beliefs of political leaders: Saddam
Hussein in front of a crowd and behind closed doors. Research & Politics, 1(April-
June), 1-7. doi:10.1177/2053168014537808
Feng, H. (2005). The operational code of Mao Zedong: Defensive or offensive realist?
Security Studies, 14(4), 637-662. doi:10.1080/09636410500468818
George, A. L. (1969). The “operational code”: A neglected approach to the study of political
leaders and decision-making. International Studies Quarterly, 13(2), 190-222.
doi:10.2307/3013944
Hafner-Burton, E.M., Hughes, D.A. & Victor, D.G. (2013). The cognitive revolution and the
political psychology of elite decision-making. Perspectives on Politics, 11(2), 368-
386. Retrieved from https://www-jstor-
org.ezproxy.leidenuniv.nl:2443/stable/43280794
He, K. & Feng, H. (2013). Xi Jinping’s operational code beliefs and China’s foreign policy.
Chinese Journal of International Politics, 6(3), 209-231. doi:10.1093/cjip/pot010
Hermann, M.G. (2005). Assessing leadership style: A trait analysis. In J.M. Post (ed.), The
psychological assessment of political leaders (178-212). Retrieved from
http://search.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.leidenuniv.nl:2048/login.aspx?direct=true&db
=nlebk&AN=310168&site=ehost-live
31
Hermann, M.G. (1980). Explaining foreign policy behavior using the personal characteristics
of political leaders. International Studies Quarterly, 24(1), 7-46.
doi:10.2307/2600126
Hermann, M.G. & Hagan, J.D. (1998). International decision making: Leadership matters.
Foreign Policy, 110(spring), 124-137. doi:10.2307/1149281
Holsti, O.R. (1962). The belief system and national images: A case study. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 6(3), 244-252. doi:10.1177/002200276200600306
Hudson, V. M. (2005). Foreign policy analysis: Actor-specific theory and the ground of
international relations. Foreign Policy Analysis, 1(1), 1-30. doi:10.1111/j.1743-
8594.2005.00001.x
Jackson, N. & Lilleker, D. (2011). Microblogging, constituency service and impression
management: UK MPs and the use of Twitter. The Journal of Legislative Studies,
17(1), 86-105. doi:10.1080/13572334.2011.545181.
Marfleet, B.G. (2000). The operational code of John F. Kennedy during the Cuban missile
crisis: A comparison of public and private rhetoric. Political Psychology, 21(3), 545-
558. doi:10.1111/0162-895X.00203
‘O Sullivan, J. (2013, April 13). John ‘O Sullivan: The two sides of Margaret Thatcher. The
Telegraph. Retrieved from https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/margaret-
thatcher/9991833/John-OSullivan-The-two-sides-of-Margaret-Thatcher.html
Özdamar, O. & Sercan, C. (2017). Understanding new Middle Eastern leadership: An
operational code approach. Political Research Quarterly, 71(1), 19-31.
doi:10.1177/1065912917721744
32
Renshon, J. (2008). Stability and change in belief systems: The operational code of George
W. Bush. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 52(6), 820-849.
doi:10.1177/0022002708323669
Renshon, J. (2009). When public statements reveal private beliefs: Assessing operational
codes at a distance. Political Psychology, 30(4), 649-661. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
9221.2009.00718.x
Robison, M. (2006). George W. Bush and the Vulcans: Leader-Advisor relations and
America’s response to the 9/11 attacks. In M. Schafer, & S.G. Walker (ed.), Beliefs
and leadership in world politics: Methods and applications of operational code
analysis (101-124). doi:10.1057/9781403983497
Schafer, M. (2013). At-a-distance analysis. in R.A.W. Rhodes, & P. ‘t Hart (ed.), The Oxford
handbook of political leadership. (1-20).
doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199653881.001.0001
Schafer, M. (2000). Issues in assessing psychological characteristics at a distance: An
introduction to the symposium. Political Psychology, 21(3), 511-527.
doi:10.1111/0162-895X.00201
Schafer, M. & Crichlow, S. (2000). Bill Clinton's operational code: Assessing source material
bias. Political Psychology, 21(3), 559-571. doi:10.1111/0162-895X.00204
Schafer, M. & Walker, S.G. (2006). Democratic leaders and the democratic peace: The
operational codes of Tony Blair and Bill Clinton. International Studies Quarterly,
509(3), 561-583. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2478.2006.00414.x
Tetlock, P.E. & Manstead, A.S.R. (1985). Impression management versus intrapsychic
explanations in social psychology: A useful dichotomy? Psychological Review, 92(1),
59-77. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.92.1.59
33
Walker, S.G., & Schafer, M. (2006). Belief and leadership in world politics: Methods and
applications of operational code analysis. doi:10.1057/9781403983497
Walker, S.G., Schafer, M. & Young, M.D. (2003). Profiling the operational codes of political
leaders. In J.M. Post (ed.), The psychological assessment of political leaders (214-
245). Retrieved from
http://search.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.leidenuniv.nl:2048/login.aspx?direct=true&db=n
lebk&AN=310168&site=ehost-live
Walker, S.G., Schafer, M. & Young, M.D. (1998). Systematic procedures for operational
code analysis: Measuring and modeling Jimmy Carter’s operational code.
International Studies Quarterly, 42(1), 175-189. doi:10.1111/0020-8833.00074
Waltz, K.N. (1979). Theory of International Politics. Retrieved from
https://books.google.com
Wendt, A. (1992). Anarchy is what states make of it: The social construction of power
politics. International Organization, 46(2), 391-425. doi:10.1007/978-1-349-
23773-9_7
Yang, Y. E., Keller, J. W. & Molnar, J. (2017). An operational code analysis of China’s
national defense white papers: 1998-2015. Journal of Chinese Political Science,
23(4), 585-602. doi:10.1007/s11366-017-9524-5
34
Appendix A
The descriptor categories are borrowed from Renshon (2009, p.661)
35
Appendix B
Phase 1: Public material
25-6-1979: TV interview for the Central Office of Information
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/104097
18-12-1979: Speech to the Foreign Policy Association
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/104199
26-6-1980: Press Conference for American Correspondents in London
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/104389
3-12-1980: House of Commons Statement
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/104453
12-6-1981: Interview for Jewish Chronicle
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/104476
15-12-1981: Speech to the Board of Deputies of British Jews
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/104762
10-6-1982: Press Conference after NATO Summit
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/104963
23-12-1982: Questions in the House of Commons
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/105078
7-6-1983: Speech at Fleetwood
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/105385
1-12-1983: Press Conference after Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/105485
12-6-1984: House of Commons Statement: London G7 Summit
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/105705
7-12-1984: Press Conference for American Correspondents in London
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/105810
29-6-1985: Press Conference after Milan European Council
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/106082
17-12-1985: Radio Interview for BBC Radio 3
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/105934
36
19-6-1986: Interview of Sunday Telegraph
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/106269
6-12-1986: Press Conference after London European Council
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/106530
22-6-1987: Interview for Politica Exterior
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/106659
22-12-1987: Interview for Jewish Chronicle
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/107002
8-6-1988: Speech to Press Association
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/107258
30-12-1988: Interview for TV-AM
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/107022
4-12-1989: Press Conference after NATO Summit
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/107837
8-6-1990: Joint Press Conference with Soviet President
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/108107
Phase 2: Private material
10-5-1979: Speech at private opening German visit
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/source/prem19/prem19-0058
11-5-1979: Speech at private luncheon for Chancellor Schmidt
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/117692
15-5-1979: Letter to Carter
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/112211
10-1-1979: Letter to Carter
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/112684
3-3-1980: Letter to Carter
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/112690
1-4-1980: Letter to Ohira
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/115737
27-4-1980: Letter to Reagan
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/121518
24-4-1980: Transcript of phone call with Giscard
37
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/118722
5-6-1980: Letter to Denis Howell MP
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/119811
23-2-1981: Letter to Indira Ghandi
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/138647
31-10-1981: Letter to Reagan
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/210214
29-1-1982: Telegram to Ronald Reagan
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/137548
28-5-1982: Letter to Reagan
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/123339
23-9-1982: Letter to Ramphal
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/152436
18-4-1983: Letter to Lord Bethell
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/132327
27-9-1983: Letter to Andropov
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/132004
1-12-1983: Letter to Robert
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/152857
22-12-1984: Letter to Reagan
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/131592
5-7-1984: Letter to Sultan Qaboos
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/152961
23-7-1984: Message to President Zhao
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/152964
12-9-1985: Letter to Reagan
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/143042
11-2-1986: Letter to Reagan
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/200455
27-2-1986: Letter to Gorbachev
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/200422
38