The Evolution of Operational Code Analysis
Author(s): Stephen G. Walker
Source:
Political Psychology , Jun., 1990, Vol. 11, No. 2 (Jun., 1990), pp. 403-418
Published by: International Society of Political Psychology
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/3791696
REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/3791696?seq=1&cid=pdf-
reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
International Society of Political Psychology is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve
and extend access to
Political Psychology
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Political Psychology, Vol. 11, No. 2, 1990
Classics in Political Psychology
The Evolution of Operational Code Analysis1
Stephen G. Walker2
Operational code analysis has evolved from a classic work by Nathan Leites,
A Study of Bolshevism (1953), in which he first analyzed the operational
code of the Politburo as a mix of cognitive heuristics and characterological
personality traits that influenced Soviet decision making. Alexander George
and Ole Holsti then isolated the cognitive aspects of the operational code
construct and conceptualized them as a typology of political belief systems. Other
scholars have applied this typology to explain the link between the be-
liefs and behavior of American foreign policymakers. The mixed results from
these efforts have led to a revival of interest in the relationship
between the cognitive and the characterological dimensions of operational
code analysis. The aim of contemporary operational code analysis is a theo-
retical synthesis of the cognitive and affective influences upon foreign poli-
cy decisions identified by middle-range cognitive and motivational theories
of political psychology.
KEY WORDS: operational code; beliefs; personality theory; foreign policy decisions.
INTRODUCTION
Nathan Leites introduced the operational code construct in
main of political psychology in his classic, two-volume work, T
tional Code of the Politburo (1951) and A Study of Bolshev
Merton (1940) had earlier coined the phrase "operational code" t
the values, world view, and response repertoire which an individual
and-shares with other members of an organization. In A Study
'This essay is a revised and expanded version of "Dimensions of Operational Co
a Working Memorandum presented at the "Psychological Approaches to Foreign
ing" Conference, The Mershon Center, Ohio State University, May 8-9, 1987
2Department of political Science, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 8
403
0162-895X/90/0600-0403$06.00/1 ? 1990 International Society of Political Ps
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
404 Walker
vism, Leit
ton's soci
domains o
shared resp
making ru
e.g., "polit
rules were
analysis of
manifesta
(Leites, 19
Fifteen ye
ed approac
ander Geo
systems a
research o
(1969, p. 1
is not one
concluded
intellectual
its structu
overcome
of Bolshev
ously in a
In extract
orge ackno
of Bolshevi
group... [t
I call the o
Consequen
... [T]he "ope
of "Bolshevik
tional code"
and norms o
acquires a ne
Bolshevik. In
ceeds in inter
tity transfo
George's in
logical asp
political st
phenomen
vestigation
remainder
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Evolution of Operational Code Analysis 405
of the Bolshevik operational code, which b
operational code studies.
Taking the findings reported in the Leite
tinction between "epistemological" and "instr
al. (1962), George organized Leites's result
set of questions designed to tap philosophical
Bolshevik ideology. Whereas philosophical (i.e
to assumptions and premises about the fun
nature of political conflict, and the role of th
tal beliefs focus upon ends-means relation
action (George, 1969, pp. 199-216).
PHILOSOPHICAL QUESTIONS
1. What is the "essential" nature of political life? Is the political univer
one of harmony or conflict? What is the fundamental character of one's po
litical opponents?
2. What are the prospects for the eventual realization of one's fun
damental political values and aspirations? Can one be optimistic or must one
be pessimistic on this score, and in what respects the one and/or the other?
3. Is the political future predictable? In what sense and to what extent
4. How much "control" or "mastery" can one have over historical d
velopment? What is one's role in "moving" and "shaping" history in the desir
direction?
5. What is the role of "chance" in human affairs and in historical de-
velopment?
INSTRUMENTAL QUESTIONS
1. What is the best approach for selecting goals or objectives for polit-
ical action?
2. How are the goals of action pursued most effectively?
3. How are the risks of political action calculated, controlled, and ac-
cepted?
4. What is the best "timing" of action to advance one's interests?
5. What is the utility and role of different means for advancing one's
interests?
Theoretically, the Bolsheviks' answers to these questions act as "bound-
aries" for rational decision-making in the sense associated with Herbert Si-
mon's concept of "bounded rationality" (March and Simon, 1958, cited by
George, 1969, p. 198). The beliefs function as guides to political decision-
making, especially under conditions of relative uncertaintly about the con-
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
406 Walker
sequences
(1969, p.
Knowledge
a simple ke
policy plann
ent types o
ternative co
to clarify t
in assessing
and risks a
The indiv
situation,
ate responses.
However, George (1969, p. 196) cautioned that the elements of the code
should be viewed "as a set of premises and beliefs about politics and not as
a set of rules and recipes to be applied mechanically to the choice of ac-
tion...." In an essay published a decade later, George (1979, pp. 95-124)
elaborated upon the nature of the causal nexus between an actor's opera-
tional code beliefs and political behavior. Because these beliefs are of a general
rather than a specific character, he argued (pp. 101 ff.) that two theoretical
premises follow:
Beliefs of this kind influence decision-making indirectly by influencing the information-
processing tasks that precede and accompany the decision-maker's choice of action;
Such beliefs do not unilaterally determine his choice of action; other variables are
also at work in determining what he will do.
George also identified two techniques to detect the impact of
operational-code beliefs upon decisions. The "congruence" procedure estab-
lishes consistency "between the content of given beliefs and the content of
the decision(s)." The "process-tracing" procedure traces in detail the steps
in the process wherein the beliefs influence the process of defining the situa-
tion, identifying options and then evaluating them prior to choice. The first
procedure establishes a plausible link between beliefs and behavior by draw-
ing attention to the possibility that the correlation is of causal significance.
The second procedure assesses and may strengthen the link by making ob-
servations of the intervening causal sequence between stimulus and response
(George, 1979, pp. 105-119). For a more detailed discussion of these two
procedures, see George and McKeown (1985).
The research program established by the Leites-George paradigm for
operational code analysis, therefore, had the following assumptions and in-
ference patterns:
Decision makers vary significantly in choice propensities, beliefs, and personality traits;
These characteristics structure the decision-maker's range of goals and shape the anal-
ysis of alternatives by the decision maker;
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Evolution of Operational Code Analysis 407
Insofar as possible, a policy-maker's choices are se
these principles and constitute the boundaries
decision-maker.
This paradigm is really a variant of the classical rational-actor paradigm of
decision-making that informs much of mainstream political scientists' profes-
sional understanding of national policy decisions. Actions are explained by
reference to the actor's goals and by reproducing the calculations which led
to the decision. Instead of making the classical rational-actor assumption
that all decision-makers operate with the same approach to rationality un-
der conditions of uncertainty, however, operational code analysis empha-
sizes their idiosyncratic features across different decision-makers (Allison,
1971, pp. 36-38).
Consequently, the development of operational code analysis represents
a potentially "progressive problem-shift" within the tradition of the classical
rational-actor paradigm (Lakatos, 1970, p. 118). That is, operational code
theory offers the prospect of accommodating the classical model's success-
ful explanations and also accounting systematically for its anomalies. The
Leites study of the Bolsheviks is considered a classic because it addressed
important theoretical and real-world questions which were anomalies within
the rational actor paradigm's traditional theoretical context. George's ver-
sion of the operational code, in particular, introduced a psychological vari-
ant of decision-making theory that "can be inferred or postulated by the
investigator on the basis of the kinds of data, observational opportunities,
and methods generally available to political scientists" (George, 1969, p. 195).
Both Leites and George recognized, as have so many scholars, that the way
national leaders view the world and each other fundamentally affects their
policy choices.
Methodologically, Leites's work illustrated how qualitative content anal-
ysis can yield fruitful insights into the spirit of a ruling group. At the same
time, the study manifested many of the usual problems of reliability and va-
lidity associated with this kind of content analysis. George refined this tech-
nique with his inventory of philosophical and instrumental questions. This
accounting scheme guided a series of comparable case studies of American
decision-makers, in turn, and eventually generated a typology of operation-
al codes. We shall scrutinize two of these case studies below in order to
demonstrate the refinement of the content analysis techniques employed in
an attempt to link beliefs and behavior. First, however, let us consider the
typology and its general relationship to the entire set of case studies.
In the course of developing more refined coding categories for opera-
tional code beliefs, Holsti (1977) implemented a three-step strategy to for-
mulate six political belief systems based upon the philosophical and
instrumental questions formulated by George.
Following Converse's definition, he conceptualized a political belief system as "a con-
figuration of ideas and attitudes in which the elements are bound together by some
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
408 Walker
form of con
ed in Holst
Inspired by
nam, 1973,
are major so
identified hy
with the pr
temporary
Finally, he
verse's defin
across indiv
differences
(Holsti, 197
This effo
fined and
(Holsti, 1
Holsti (1
characteri
situations
ous, scarc
located de
WHAT ARE THE
FUNDAMENTAL SOURCES
OF CONFLICT?
Human nature
Attributes of
nations
International
system
WHAT IS THE FUNDAMENTAL NATURE
OF THE POLITICAL UNIVERSE?
Harmonious
[conflict is
temporary]
Conflictual
[conflict is
permanent]
I ( I
I I
I i I
I ( I
I , 1
I ( I
I I
I A : D (
ill
ill
I ,
I I
I I
t I
I , (
I i ,
I I (
ill
I B I E I
III
ill
1 I
ill
I I i
I I
I
ill
I ( (
I , I
I C II F :r
I I r
r 1
I
Fig.
bel
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Evolution of Operational Code Analysis 409
among options. The dominant inference pat
tions is a series of interactive statements bet
maker and environmental features, which
orge's theoretical premises about the causa
havior.
Holsti's formulation of an operational code typology has the following
characteristics as a social-psychological theory of cognitive consistency. The
basic unit of analysis is individual behavior constrained by the decision mak-
er's belief system. The key concepts are philosophical and instrumental be-
liefs, belief system, and foreign policy strategies and tactics. The dominant
inference pattern is the principle of cognitive consistency, from which are
derived two general propositions: (a) beliefs tend to reinforce one another
to form a coherent belief system; (b) under specified conditions beliefs con-
strain the range of alternative choices and thereby influence the final deci-
sion (Holsti, 1977; Walker, 1989, p. 20).
Holsti's application of Converse's (1964) definition of belief system to
develop a set of operational code types, therefore, is a pivotal development
in the evolution of operational code analysis. It synthesized the case studies
of decision-making inspired by George's (1969) article and defined new lines
of inquiry into the cognitive consistency, the psychodynamic origins, and
the behavioral consequences of operational code belief systems. The major
empirical questions raised by the typology were the following:
Do the philosophical and instrumental beliefs of foreign policy decision-makers con-
stitute a "belief system?"
Do these belief systems resemble the ideal types of belief systems in the Holsti typology?
Do each of these types of belief systems consistently influence in different ways
the strategically-located individual's definition of the situation, his decision, and its
implementation under the conditions of ambiguity, scarcity and complexity speci-
fied by the operational code theory of cognitive consistency?
These questions raise subsidiary questions regarding the measurement and
analysis techniques which will identify and relate beliefs, situations, deci-
sions, and behavior in a reliable and valid way.
George (1969) has illustrated the potential use of qualitative content
analysis in his re-examination of the Leites study, while Holsti (1977, pp.
37-145) has explored the use of quantitative content analysis by constructing
a manual for retrieving the beliefs in his typology. However, they have left
to other scholars the tasks of putting these two types of content analysis to
extensive use.
After the appearance of George's (1969) article, several operational code
case studies of U.S. decision-makers followed. The subjects included John
Foster Dulles, Frank Church, Arthur Vandenberg, Dean Acheson, Henry
Kissinger, James F. Byrnes, J. William Fulbright, and Mark Hatfield (An-
derson, 1973a,b; Caldwell, 1976; Holsti, 1970, 1977; Johnson, 1977; McLel-
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
410 Walker
lan, 1971;
technique
tain expr
a few stu
Brandt, a
research d
by, 1969;
Holsti (19
the result
operation
analysis i
individual
ogy. Instea
other me
Stuart and
to see if th
1956) vary a
tions; in tu
operational
Walker (197
bargaining
a qualitativ
Indirect t
individua
by operat
of operati
validated
An examp
201-269) a
content a
counting s
tal beliefs
content a
with one a
belief sys
A subseq
that did n
tive conte
by the ca
from mor
to a comb
the comp
Holsti typ
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Evolution of Operational Code Analysis 411
ping beliefs existed in the original version an
Fig. 2).
Walker and Falkowski (1984a,b) used the
typology as the basis for their research into
sis bargaining tactics of U.S. presidents and s
Type A
Philosophical: Conflict is temporary, caused by human misunderstanding and miscommunica-
tion. A "conflict spiral," based upon misperception and impulsive responses, is the major danger
of war. Opponents are often influenced by nonrational conditions, but tend to respond in kind
to conciliation and firmness. Optimism is warranted, based upon a leader's ability and willing-
ness to shape historical development. The future is relatively predictable, and control over it
is possible.Instrumental: Establish goals within a framework that emphasizes shared interest.
Pursue broadly international goals incrementally with flexible strategies that control risks by
avoiding escalation and acting quickly when conciliation opportunities arise. Emphasize resources
that establish a climate for negotiation and compromise and avoid the early use of force.
Type B
Philosophical: Conflict is temporary, caused by warlike states; miscalculation and appeasement
are the major causes of war. Opponents are rational and deterrable. Optimism is warranted
regarding realization of goals. The political future is relatively predictable, and control over
historical development is possible. Instrumental: One should seek optimal goals vigorously wi-
thin a comprehensive framework. Control risks by limiting means rather than ends. Any tactic
and resource may be appropriate, including the use of force when it offers prospects for large
gains with limited risk.
Type C
Philosophical: Conflict is temporary; it is possible to restructure the state system to reflect the
latent harmony of interests. The source of conflict is the anarchical state system, which permits
a variety of causes to produce war. Opponents vary in nature, goals, and responses to concilia-
tion and firmness. One should be pessimistic about goals unless the state system is changed,
because predictability and control over historical development is low under anarchy. Instrumental:
Establish optimal goals vigorously within a comprehensive framework. Pursue shared goals,
but control risks by limiting means rather than ends. Act quickly when conciliation opportuni-
ties arise and delay escalatory actions whenever possible; other resources than military capabil-
ities are useful.
Type DEF
Philosophical: Conflict is permanent, caused by human nature (D), nationalism (E) or interna-
tional anarchy (F). Power disequilibria are major dangers of war. Opponents may vary, and
responses to conciliation or firmness are uncertain. Optimism declines over the long run and
in the short run depends upon the quality of leadership and a power equilibrium. Predictability
is limited, as is control over historical development. Instrumental: Seek limited goals flexibly
with moderate means. Use military force if the opponent and circumstances require it, but only
as a final resource.
Fig. 2. Revised Holsti typology (Source: Walker, 1983, 1986).
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
412 Walker
ational co
operation
dy, Rusk,
moves by
their resp
colleagues
code belie
of belief s
revised ve
Instead, t
makers' s
liefs from
pattern in
nitive beli
makers. A
as concept
for the ex
filiation, a
Winter an
tics by th
these cong
1984b).
These results suggest a future research agenda with the following tasks.
One is to establish a strong conceptual bridge between operational code anal-
ysis and recent research in motivational psychology dealing with the needs
for power, affiliation, and achievement. Another is to replace the belief-system
version of cognitive consistency theory with insights from the "revolution
in cognitive psychology" (Herrmann, 1988). The operational code construct
may turn out to be a useful umbrella for integrating various middle-range
theories of cognitive and motivational psychology into a "grand theory" of
political psychology.
However, it is also possible that operational code research may be an-
nexed by one of these neighboring research communities or partitioned among
them. An individual's operational code may structure the "menu for choice,"
thereby defining the range of the decision-maker's choice propensities, but
operational code theory is relatively silent about the cognitive and emotion-
al processes that accompany the specific definitions of the situation, deci-
sion, and action. The connection between an individual's operational code
and political behavior, therefore, has often been asserted either on intuitive
grounds or established with the "congruence" technique in somewhat gener-
al terms by reference to a general relationship between the code's contents
and aggregate behavior patterns. The "process-tracing" technique has not
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Evolution of Operational Code Analysis 413
been employed extensively to examine interv
perceptions, which are the immediate antece
Indeed, these cognitive processes have t
critics of operational code analysis as riva
Cottam, 1986, pp. 9-17). The findings fro
understanding of foreign policy decision-m
(cf., Jervis, 1976), but there has been relativ
late them either to the operational code appr
with motivations and personality. Nor has
to explore the relationships between operatio
tional processes of ego defense associated
The cognitive process literature has also d
motivational psychology and personality t
that motivated biases as well as cognitive
information (Jervis, 1976, pp. 356-381; Je
and nature of motivated biases have not y
by cognitive theorists, even though there is
fort may be worthwhile (Emmons, 1987,
and Levi, 1982). Their reluctance to tackl
because it could invoke a broader, explicitly
text for interpreting such processes of s
schematization, and dissonance reduction.
Operational code analysis may have the po
because it has evolved into a research prog
cognitive dimensions. Two recent example
a study which investigates Woodrow Wils
context of the debate over the relationship b
the self-defeating pattern of his political de
cation debate over the Treaty of Versaill
study of Henry Kissinger by Starr (1984), w
beliefs, perceptions, and foreign policy b
The research design for the Wilson study
tegrating motivational and cognitive expla
The investigation is guided by the formulation of
incorporates motivational and cognitive disposit
The hypotheses for investigation are derived from
ty disorders testable within the context of operati
orge, 1964; Tucker, 1977, Post, 1983)
The measurement of motivations and beliefs is done
sis techniques. (Walker, 1986)
The analysis involves a comparison of the con
schemata in Wilson's annual addresses to
imagery in Wilson's speeches during three d
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
414 Walker
ing the Ve
co and th
philosoph
achievemen
the expans
sonality a
Starr's (19
tively, wi
litics. The
analyzing
analysis of
for classif
an attempt
havior of
Starr esta
ational cod
tracing tec
him to be
fore, his
of his perc
of the Sov
hostility (
However,
ship betw
He conclu
[I]t is appare
behavior. Al
ing the perio
contained - d
Union and
The mixed
ceptions, a
with emp
Beliefs m
is not the
Perception
ages may
The instrum
behavior tow
but behavior would not.
The philosophical beliefs in an operational code may dispose an actor to diagnose
differently the respective situations surrounding two objects of the same type or even
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Evolution of Operational Code Analysis 415
the same object at two different observation points. Th
would not vary, but behavior would.
Either possibility could account for Starr's stat
tionships between perceptions and behavior (W
complex alternative hypothesis is that Starr's
for predicting behavior is correct - however, th
images rather than object-images. That is, a close
tween self-schema/self-scripts and behavior. Fro
to George's questions for tapping instrumental b
cal action become dimensions of the decision-mak
in the political universe. These self-scripts, in tu
vations embedded deeply in the individual's perso
If so, then decision-making is driven as much
defense and the mediation of self-other relation
appraisal (Brewster-Smith, 1968). In this view, th
becomes an analytical conduit through which
which an analyst observes their interaction. If
analysis continues in this direction, it would rep
terological feature which George and Holsti ex
developed its cognitive aspect.
This move, in addition to being faithful to th
ational code analysis represented by Leites, w
pated by his cognitive revisionists. In his semi
195-196) addressed this very possibility with
[I]t is one of the attractive features of the operational cod
inclined political scientists that it can serve as a usefu
chodynamic interpretations of unconscious dimensions
role in behavior under different conditions...
The belief system about politics is part of the cognitive and affective portion of the
ego structure of personality; as such it serves an adaptive function for coping with
reality. But at the same time the emergence of a belief system may be affected by
developmental problems encountered in personality formation; if so, beliefs may then
also serve ego defensive functions vis-a-vis unconscious wishes and anxieties...
Thus, once an actor's approach to political calculation has been formulated by the
researchers, he can proceed-if he so wishes and is able to do so-to relate some
of the beliefs in question to other motivational variables of a psychodynamic character.
Indeed, George (1969, p. 196) concludes that a knowledge of the decision-
maker's beliefs facilitates the task of assessing the extent to which behavior
is based upon reality-testing or reflects the influence of latent motives and
ego defenses.
In A Study of Bolshevism, the use of operational code analysis bridged
the relationship between political choice and the cognitive, affective, and de-
velopmental features of the Bolshevik personality. This accomplishment
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
416 Walker
makes the
al Society
The evolu
metaphor
ers have c
research p
to serve as
ciplines r
REFERENCES
Anderson, J. (1973a). "The Operational code approach: The George construct an
thur H. Vandenberg's operational code belief system." Presented at the Ann
of the American Political Science Association, New Orleans, LA.
Anderson, J. (1973b). The Operational Code Belief System of Senator Arthur Van
Application of the George Construct, University of Michigan, Unpublish
sertation.
Asbhy, N. (1969). Schumacher and Brandt: The divergent operational codes of
Socialist leaders. Standford University mimeo.
Brim, O., Glass, D., Lavin, D., and Goodman, N. (1962). Personality and Decisi
Studies in the Social Psychology of Thinking, Stanford University Press, Sta
Caldwell, D. (1976). The operational code of Senator Mark Hatfield. Stanford Univ
Converse, P. (1964). The nature of belief systems in mass publics. In Apter, D.
and Discontent, Free Press, New York.
Cottam, M. (1986). Foreign Policy Decision Making: The Influence of Cognitio
Boulder, Colo.
Emmons, R. (1987). Narcissism: Theory and measurement. J. Personal. Social P
Etheredge, L. (1979). A World of Men. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Etheredge, L. (1985). Can Governments Learn? Pergamon, New York.
George, A. (1969). The 'operational code': A neglected approach to the study of
ers and decision-making. Int. Studies Qtrly. 23: 190-222.
George, A., (1979). The causal nexus between cognitive beliefs and decision-mak
The 'operational code.' In Falkowski, L. (ed.), Psychological Models in I
Politics, Westview, Boulder, pp. 95-124.
George, A., and George, M. (1964). Woodrow Wilson and Colonel House: A Perso
Dover, New York.
George, A., and McKeown, T. (1985). Case studies and theories of organizational decison making.
Advan. Inf. Process. Organ. 2: 21-58.
Herrmann, R. (1988). The Empirical challenge of the cognitive revolution: A strategy for draw-
ing inferences about perceptions. Int. Studies Qtrly. 32: 175-204.
Holsti, 0. (1970). The Operational code approach to the study of political leaders: John
Foster Dulles' philosophical and instrumental beliefs. Canad. J. Polit. Sci. 3: 123-157.
Holsti, 0. (1977). The 'operational code' as an approach to the analysis of belief systems. Final
Report to the National Science Foundation, Grant SOC 75-15368, Duke University,
Durham, N.C.
Jervis, R. (1976). Perception and Misperception in International Politics, Princeton Univ. Press,
Princeton, N.J.
Jervis, R. (1985). Perceiving and Coping with threat. In R. Jervis, R. N. Lebow, and J. Stein,
et al., Psychology and Deterrence, Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, Md. pp. 13-33.
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Evolution of Operational Code Analysis 417
Johnson, L. (1977). Operational codes and the predictio
Church at midcareer. In M. Hermann (ed.), A Ps
Leaders, Free Press, New York.
Kavanagh, D. (1970). The operational code of Ramsey
Lakatos, I. (1970). Falsification and the methodology o
tos and A. Musgrave (Eds.), Criticism and the Grow
sity Press, Cambridge, pp. 91-196.
LeBow, R. N. (1981). Between Peace and War, John
Leites, N. (1951). The Operational Code of the Poli
Leites, N. (1953). A Study of Bolshevism, Free Pres
Leites, N. (1964). Kremlin moods. RM-3535-ISA (Jan
ca, Calif.
March, J., and Simon, H. (1958). Organizations, W
McLellan, D. (1971). The Operational code approach
Acheson's philosophical and instrumental belief
Merton, R. (1940). Bureaucratic structure and Per
Bureaucracy, Free Press, New York.
Osgood, R., et al (1956). Evaluative assertion analysi
Post, J. (1983). Woodrow Wilson Re-examined: The m
disputations. Polit. Psychol. 4: 289-306.
Putnam, R. (1973). The Beliefs of Politicians, Yale
Smith, M. Brewster (1968). A map for the analysis of
24: 15-28.
Starr, H. (1984). Henry Kissinger: Perceptions of International Politics, University Press of
Kentucky, Lexington, Ky.
Stuart, D. (1979). The relative potency of leader beliefs as a determinant of foreign policy: John
F. Kennedy's operational code. University of Southern California Doctoral Dissertation
(January).
Stuart D., and Starr, H. (1981/82). The 'inherent bad faith' model reconsidered: Dulles, Kennedy,
and Kissinger. Polit. Psychol. 3: 1-33.
Tetlock, P. (1987). Book Review: The 19th Annual Carnegie Symposium on Cognition: Politi-
cal Cognition, edited by R. Lau and D. Sears (Hillsdale, NJ.: Erlbaum), Polit. Psychol.
8: 139-144.
Tetlock P., and Levi, A. (1982). Attribution bias: On the inconclusiveness of the cognition
motivation debate. J. Exp. Social Psychol. 18: 66-88.
Tucker, R. (1977). The Georges' Wilson reexamined: An essay on psychobiography. Am. Poli
Sci. Rev. 71: 606-618.
Tweraser, K. (1974). Changing patterns of political beliefs: The foreign policy operational
of J. William Fulbright. Sage Professional Papers in American Politics, Number 04-
Walker, S. (1977). The interface between beliefs and behavior: Henry Kissinger's opera
code and the Vietnam War. J. Confl. Res. 21: 129-168.
Walker, S. (1983). The motivational foundations of political belief systems: A re-analy
the operational code construct. Int. Studies Qtrly. 27: 179-201.
Walker, S. (1986). Woodrow Wilson's operational code. Presented at the Annual Meetin
the International Society of Political Psychology, Rai Conference Center, Amsterdam
The Netherlands (June 29-July 4).
Walker, S. (1987). The impact of personality structure and cognitive processes upon Amer
foreign policy decisions: Part I. Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Po
ical Science Association, Chicago, Ill.
Walker, S. (1988). The impact of personality structure and cognitive processes upon Amer
foreign policy decisions: Part II. Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American
litical Science Association, Washington, D.C.
Walker, S. (1989). Bridging the gap between 'bounded' and 'substantive' rationality in fore
policy decision making. Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Political Sci
Association Meeting, Atlanta, Ga.
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
418 Walker
Walker, S., a
ies of state
33-51.
Walker, S., a
policy leader
Psychology
Winter, D., a
ers. In M. H
New York.
This content downloaded from
199.83.221.44 on Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms