1
Cultural Evolution and Memetics
Article prepared for the Encyclopedia of Complexity and System Science
Francis Heylighen & Klaas Chielens
Evolution, Complexity and Cognition group
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Article Outline
Glossary
Definition
Introduction
Defining the meme
Dynamics of meme replication and spread
Social structures
Computer simulations of cultural evolution
Selection criteria for memes
Parasitic memes
Empirical Tests
Future Directions
Bibliography
Glossary
Culture: the attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors that, for a certain group, define their general
way of life and that they have taken over from others.
Cultural evolution: the development of culture over time, as conceptualized through the
mechanisms of variation and natural selection of cultural elements
Replicator: an information pattern that is able to make copies of itself, typically with the
help of another system. Examples are genes, memes, and (computer) viruses.
Meme: a cultural replicator; a unit of imitation or communication.
Memeplex (or meme complex): a collection of mutually supporting memes, which tend
to replicate together
Memetics: the theoretical and empirical science that studies the replication, spread and
evolution of memes
2
Fitness: the overall success rate of a replicator, as determined by its degree of adaptation
to its environment, and the three requirements of longevity, fecundity and copying-
fidelity.
Longevity: the duration that an individual replicator survives.
Fecundity: the speed of reproduction of a replicator, as measured by the number of
copies made per time unit
Copying-fidelity: the degree to which a replicator is accurately reproduced.
Vertical transmission: transmission of traits (memes or genes) from parents to offspring
Horizontal transmission: transmission of traits between individuals of the same
generation
Memotype: a meme in the form of information held in an individual’s memory.
Mediotype: a meme as expressed in an external medium, such as a text, an artefact, a
song, or a behavior.
Sociotype: the group or community of individuals who hold a particular meme in their
memory.
Definition
Cultural traits are transmitted from person to person, similarly to genes or viruses.
Cultural evolution therefore can be understood through the same basic mechanisms of
reproduction, spread, variation, and natural selection that underlie biological evolution.
This implies a shift from genes as units of biological information to a new type of units of
cultural information: memes. The concept of meme can be defined as an information
pattern, held in an individual's memory, which is capable of being copied to another
individual's memory. Memetics can then be defined as the theoretical and empirical
science that studies the replication, spread and evolution of memes. Memes differ in their
degree of fitness, i.e. adaptedness to the socio-cultural environment in which they
propagate. Fitter memes will be more successful in being communicated, “infecting”
more individuals and thus spreading over a larger population. This biological analogy
allows us to apply Darwinian concepts and theories to model cultural evolution.
Introduction
The transmission of cultural traits is a process that in many ways resembles the spread of
an infectious disease: the carrier of a certain idea, behavior or attitude directly or
indirectly communicates this idea to another person, who now also becomes a carrier,
ready to “infect” further people. For example, after you heard your neighbor whistling a
catchy tune a couple of times, you may well start whistling it yourself, thus being ready
to infect some more people with the tune. Similarly, after you hear your friends
recommend a new electronic tool they have bought, you may well buy one yourself, and,
if you like it, start recommending it to those acquaintances who do not know it yet. Thus,
cultural traits can be seen as analogous to mind viruses (Dawkins, 1993; Brodie, 1996),
idea viruses (Godin, 2002) or thought contagions (Lynch, 1996), which are reproduced
from mind to mind via imitation or communication. A truly successful trait is one that
spreads like an epidemic, infecting the whole of the population, in order to end up as a
3
stable, endemic component of that population’s culture. For example, the tune may
become part of the repertoire of “evergreens” that everyone knows, and the tool may
become as widespread as the mobile phone or color television.
This virus metaphor is attractive in that it suggests a new perspective and new
methods, such as epidemiology (Aunger, 2002), for studying the dynamics of culture.
However, in order to turn it into a well-founded scientific theory, we need a deeper
understanding of the underlying assumptions and implications of this analogy. For this,
we can turn to the science that studies viruses and other self-reproducing systems:
biology.
It is an old idea to see a correspondence between cultural and biological
evolution, with cultural entities undergoing similar processes of variation, reproduction
and natural selection as organisms or genes. Around the end of the 18th century Western
linguists discovered the similarities between different languages. Sir William Jones gave
birth to the field of language evolution studies, more specifically in the search for the
origin of languages, and their “common descent” (van Wyhe, 2005). The German linguist
August Schleicher attempted to recreate this common ancestor of languages, publishing
tree-diagrams of languages as early as 1853, six years before Darwin published his Origin
of Species. In an 1870 article one can already read: “How does a new style of architecture
prevail? How, again, does fashion change? (…) or take language itself (…) it is the idea
of ‘Natural Selection’ that was wanted” (Müller, 1870). The American philosopher and
psychologist William James (1880) pointed out in a presentation to the Harvard Natural
History Society that: “A remarkable parallel, ..., obtains between the facts of social
evolution on the one hand, and of zoölogical evolution as expounded by Mr. Darwin on
the other.”
By the end of the 20th century, the parallel study of cultural and biological
evolution got a new impetus with the introduction, by Richard Dawkins (1989, first
edition 1976), of the concept of meme (for a review see (Aunger, 2004)). A meme, named
in analogy with a gene, is defined as a cultural replicator, i.e. an element of culture such
as a tradition, belief, idea, melody, or fashion, that can be held in memory and transmitted
or copied to the memory of another person. The core idea of memetics is that memes
differ in their degree of fitness, i.e. adaptedness to the socio-cultural environment in
which they propagate (de Jong, 1999; Heylighen, 1998). Mutations and recombinations
of existing ideas will produce a variety of memes that compete with each other for the
attention of people. Fitter memes will be more successful in being communicated,
“infecting” more individuals and thus spreading over a larger population. The resulting
evolutionary dynamics is one of variation creating new meme variants, followed by
natural selection retaining only the ones that are most fit. Thus, the Darwinian principle
of the survival of the fittest can be seen to underlie cultural evolution as well as biological
evolution (Aunger, 2001, 2003; Durham, 1991; Lumsden & Wilson, 1981).
The memetic perspective on culture is complementary to the traditional social
science perspective, which focuses on the characteristics of the individuals and groups
communicating rather than on the characteristics of the information being communicated.
This does not imply a "memetic reductionism", which would deny individual control over
what you communicate. It just notes that in many cases the dynamics of information
propagation and the ensuing evolution of culture can be modeled more simply from the
4
"meme's point of view" than by analyzing the conscious or unconscious intentions of the
communicating agents.
Over the past thirty years, several models of cultural evolution have been
proposed that study the propagation of memes or similarly defined cultural traits (e.g.
“culturgens” (Lumsden & Wilson, 1981) or “mnemons” (Campbell, 1974)). Most of
those models are purely theoretical, proposing various conceptualizations, implications
and speculations based on the memetic perspective (e.g. Blackmore, 2000; Dennett,
1995; Flinn & Alexander, 1982; Hull, 1982; Lake, 1998). Some studies are mathematical
in nature, applying techniques from mathematical genetics or epidemiology to
quantitatively estimate the spread of particular types of memes within a population (e.g.
Cavalli-Sforza & Feldman, 1981; Lumsden & Wilson, 1981; Boyd & Richerson, 1985;
Lynch, 1998). Others are computational, simulating the transmission of knowledge or
behaviors between software agents (e.g. Gabora, 1995; Best, 1997; Bull, Holland &
Blackmore, 2001). A few are observational case studies, where the spread of a particular
cultural phenomenon, such as a chain letter, an urban legend, or a social stereotype, is
investigated qualitatively or quantitatively (e.g. Goodenough & Dawkins, 2002; Schaller
et al., 2002; Chielens, 2003, Bangerter & Heath, 2004).
However, in spite of these advances, the memetic perspective on culture is not
very well developed yet, and remains controversial (Aunger, 2001; Atran, 2001;
Edmonds, 2002). There are several reasons why memeticists have not yet been able to
convince the bulk of social and cultural scientists of the soundness of their approach.
First, the analogy with the gene, and its embodiment as DNA, seems to indicate
that a meme should have a clear, well-delineated, stable structure. (Although one should
note that natural selection was proposed by Darwin well before genes were postulated by
Mendel, and a century before their structure was elucidated by Watson and Crick).
Cultural entities, such as beliefs, ideas, fashions, and norms, on the other hand are
typically ambiguous, difficult to delimit and constantly changing. Memetic models that
are based on “hard”, explicitly defined units therefore only seem applicable to a very
small subset of cultural phenomena, such as chain letters. However, the biological
analogy does not imply such rigidity: unlike higher organisms, the genes of bacteria and
viruses too are in a flux, constantly mutating and exchanging bits of DNA with other
organisms, but that does not imply that they do not obey evolutionary principles.
A second criticism of the memetic approach is that people are not passive
“vehicles” or “carriers” of ideas and beliefs, the way they may carry viruses. Individuals
actively interpret the information they receive in the light of their existing knowledge and
values, and on the basis of that may decide to reject, accept, or modify the information
that is communicated to them. In order words, individuals and groups actively intervene
in the formulation and propagation of culture. In that sense, cultural evolution is
Lamarckian rather than purely Darwinian.
A final criticism is that memetic models have not yet been sufficiently subjected
to empirical tests (Edmonds, 2002; Chielens & Heylighen, 2005). Part of the reason is
that most memetic theories do not make sufficiently concrete predictions to be falsifiable
by observation. Most of these theories remain very speculative—often hardly better than
a form of “armchair philosophy”. Moreover, until now there simply have been very few
empirical studies of how memes propagate, whether in the laboratory (e.g. Lyons &
5
Kashima, 2003) or in real life (e.g. Bangerter & Heath, 2004), and even fewer links have
been established between these observations and theoretical or mathematical models.
We will try to address these criticisms in the remainder of this article. First, we
will discuss the issue of how to define a meme in an as accurate way as possible. Then
we will review the process of transmission of memes between individuals, emphasizing
the active role played by an individual’s cognitive structure. This will give us a basis to
review the dynamics of memetic propagation across a population, and the mathematical
and simulation models that have been used to study it. To introduce empirical tests, we
will first discuss the criteria that determine the fitness of a meme, specifying which
memes are most likely to spread. We will then summarize a few experiments and case
studies in which the predictive value of such selection criteria was tested. Finally, we will
discuss some potential future applications of memetic research.
Defining the meme
Replicators
The original definition of a meme by Dawkins (1989) was based on the concept of
replicator. A replicator is a system that is able to make copies of itself, typically with the
help of some other system. Examples include real and computer viruses, which need
respectively a cell and a computer processor to make copies of themselves. The
fundamental example discussed by Dawkins is the gene, the string of DNA that carries
the information on how to make a protein, and that is copied with the help of the cellular
machinery whenever a cell divides. A meme too is a replicator, as it is copied whenever
information is transmitted from one individual to another via communication or imitation.
Because replicators can be reproduced in different quantities, they are subject to
natural selection: the one that tends to produce the largest number of replicas over an
extended time span will win the competition with less productive replicators. To succeed
in this, according to Dawkins (1989), a good replicator should exhibit the following
characteristics:
• longevity: the longer any instance of the replicating pattern survives, the more
copies can be made of it. A drawing made by etching lines in the sand is likely to
be erased before anybody could have reproduced it.
• fecundity: the faster the rate of copying, the more the replicator will spread. An
industrial printing press can churn out many more copies of a pamphlet than an
office-copying machine.
• copying-fidelity: the more accurate or faithful the copy, the more will remain of
the initial pattern after several rounds of copying. If a painting is reproduced by
making photocopies from photocopies, the picture will quickly become
unrecognizable.
Dawkins called memes the “new” replicators, in the sense that they appeared very
recently compared to genes. The reason for this evolution is clear: the typically human
ability of imitation, i.e. learning new ideas, knowledge or behavior by copying what
another individual already learnt, provides a tremendous shortcut for the multiple
6
experiences of trial-and-error that are otherwise necessary to discover a useful new
behavior pattern (Campbell, 1974). While some other animals are capable of limited
imitation—e.g. songbirds learn songs from each other, and apes can imitate simple
behaviors (Bonner, 1980)—this capability is best developed in humans (Blackmore,
2000). This accounts for our ability to develop a culture that is passed on from generation
to generation, thus accumulating ever more useful knowledge in the course of its
evolution. In that sense, memes can be seen to be responsible for the extremely fast
development of human society and its subsequent dominance of the ecosystem.
Memes vs. Genes
When we compare the two most important replicators, genes and memes, we immediately
notice a number of fundamental differences. Genes can only be transmitted from parent
to offspring. Memes can in principle be transmitted between any two individuals. For
genes to be transmitted, you need one generation. Memes can be transmitted in the span
of minutes. Meme propagation is also much faster than gene spreading, because gene
replication is restricted by the relatively small number of offspring a single parent can
have, whereas the number of individuals that can take over a meme from a single
individual is almost unlimited. Moreover, it seems much easier for memes to undergo
variation, since the information in the nervous system is more plastic than that in the
DNA, and since individuals can come into contact with many more different sources of
novel memes. On the other hand, selection processes too are more efficient because of
“vicarious” selection (Campbell, 1974): the carrier of a meme does not need to be killed
in order to eliminate an inadequate meme; it suffices that he witnesses or hears about the
troubles of another individual due to that same meme.
The conclusion is that cultural evolution will be several orders of magnitude faster
and more efficient than genetic evolution. It should not surprise us then that during the
last ten thousand years, humans have hardly changed on the genetic level, whereas their
culture has undergone the most radical developments. In practice the superior evolvability
of memes also means that in cases where genetic and memetic replicators are in
competition, we would expect the memes to win, even though the genes would start with
the advantage of a well-established, stable structure (Blackmore, 2000), as we will
discuss further when reviewing computer simulations of such dual evolution.
While memes have a much higher fecundity than genes, their plasticity implies a
much lower copying-fidelity: a message as received and understood by an individual will
rarely be identical to the one that was expressed, as illustrated by the many
misunderstandings and reinterpretations during communication. Yet, we should not
conclude from this that effective communication is impossible: if you believed that, you
would not be reading this article, hoping to assimilate the main ideas presented by its
authors. The reason for such mixture of accurate transmission with creative
reinterpretation is that, most fundamentally, humans are cognitive agents. This means that
they process incoming information depending on the knowledge they already have and
the computing machinery they are endowed with, selectively retain some of that
information in their memory, and selectively express some of that information to other
agents. Generally, the transmission of information by an agent will change both the agent,
7
who has learned something new, and the information, which will be affected by the
knowledge the agent already had.
Therefore, a meme reaching an agent, if it is reproduced at all, will typically be
transmitted in a changed form, possibly recombined with other information learned
earlier. This explains why it is often so difficult to define or pinpoint an individual meme.
In that sense, cultural evolution is Lamarckian: characteristics acquired during the
lifetime of the meme’s carrier can be transmitted to later carriers. Lamarckian evolution,
while not being Darwinian in the strict sense, is still subject to the principle of natural
selection: acquired characteristics too will be passed on selectively, depending on their
fitness. Natural selection by definition will pick out the memes who survive this
transmission process relatively unchanged. Therefore, the fittest memes, such as certain
songs, religious beliefs, scientific laws, or brand names, will have a stable, recognizable
identity, even though they may differ in appearance, as exemplified by the many
renditions of a song or joke. All such memes together define the culture shared by a
community.
This identity will be reinforced by positive feedback that characterizes the non-
linear interaction between meme and carrier: the more people encounter a particular
version of a meme, the more they will tend to adapt their own version to this common
prototype, the more commonly they will express this version, and thus the more people
will encounter it. In this way, a variety of versions that are constantly being exchanged
within the same group will tend to converge to a single, canonical version (Axelrod,
1997). A newcomer to this group with a variant version will be extensively subjected to
the accepted version, and is likely to eventually give in to this conformist pressure by
adopting the majority version (Boyd & Richerson, 1985).
This winner-takes-all dynamics, where the initially most frequent variant comes
to dominate all others, is elegantly illustrated by computer simulations of the evolution of
language, in which many communicating individuals who use different words for the
same concept quickly converge on a single word (Steels, 1997). Similarly, most systems
of ethics or religious belief tend to actively suppress any variant from their canonical
version. This explains why in spite of the great variability of memes, we generally have
no problems determining whether an individual belongs to a certain religious or linguistic
group (Heylighen & Campbell, 1995). Note that such non-linear reinforcement does not
exist for genes, since genes are transmitted only once, from parent to offspring.
Moreover, once a gene is given, it can no longer be affected by the presence of other
versions in the population.
Another fundamental difference between memes and genes is that for memes
there is no equivalent for the traditional distinction between genotype (the information
carried by the genes and passed on to the next generation) and phenotype (the specific
appearance of an organism as determined by genes and environmental influences). In
biological evolution, the genotype is the site of evolutionary variation (since variations in
the phenotype are not passed on during reproduction) and the phenotype the site of
selection (since it is the organism as a whole that survives and reproduces, or is
eliminated). In memetics, we can distinguish three levels:
1) the memotype denotes the information as held in an individual’s memory;
2) the mediotype denotes that information as expressed in an external medium, such
as a text, an artefact, a song, or a behavior;
8
3) the sociotype denotes the group or community of individuals who hold that
information in their memory (Blackmore, 2000).
Variation and selection take place on all three levels. A memotype can vary or be
eliminated (forgotten) while residing in an individual’s brain. A mediotype can similarly
mutate (e.g. via a printing error) or be lost, and a sociotype can change when new
individuals are added to the group, who may introduce different memes, or be eliminated
(as when an unsuccessful tribe dies out). In conclusion, the processes of variation and
selection, while analogous at the deepest level, are much more complex for memes than
for genes.
Delimiting the memetic unit
What are the elements that make up a meme? In order to analyze meme structure, we can
use some concepts from cognitive science, the discipline that studies mental content.
Perhaps the most popular unit used to represent knowledge in artificial intelligence is the
production rule. It has the form “if condition, then action”. The action leads in general to
the activation of another condition or category. A production rule can thus be analyzed as
a combination of even more primitive elements: two concepts or categories and a
connection (the “then” part, which makes the first category entail the second one). For
example, a meme like “God is omnipotent” can be interpreted as “if a phenomenon is
God (it belongs to the category of God-like entities), then that phenomenon is omnipotent
(it belongs to the category of omnipotent entities)”.
Production rules are connected when the output condition (action) of the one
matches the input condition of the other. This makes it possible to construct complex
cognitive systems on the basis of simple rules. In memetics, such systems are called
meme complexes or memeplexes. For example, a scientific theory or a religious system of
belief may be represented as a collection of mutually connected propositions or
production rules, such as “God is omnipotent”, “God is good”, “God punishes bad
people”, “if you steal, you are bad”, etc. This collection of rules together determines a
knowledge system that allows making inferences, such as “if you steal, God will punish
you”. Even more concrete perceptual or behavioral memes, such as a tune, might be
modeled in this way, as concatenations of production rules of the type “if C (musical note
distinguished), then E (note produced and subsequently distinguished)”, “if E, then A”,
and so on. (In fact, genetic information too can be modeled using networks of “if... then”
productions: a DNA string is activated by the presence of certain proteins (condition) to
which it responds by producing specific other proteins (action), see (Kauffmann, 1993)).
Production rules—or at least a simplified, binary representation of them, called
“classifiers”—can be used to build computer simulations of cognitive evolution, using
genetic algorithms, i.e. algorithmically applied operators that perform the equivalents of
mutation, recombination, and selection on the basis of “fitness” on such strings (Holland
et al., 1986). Although classifier models generally do not take into account distinct
carriers, this looks like a promising road to study the evolution of memeplexes formally
and computationally. As we will see later, though, simulations of cultural evolution are
usually limited to the mutation and spread of simple memes, ignoring the cognitive
9
structures and processes that support inferences and that create new meme(plexe)s out of
combinations of existing ones.
Even if we would model memes as connected sets of production rules, we still
have the problem of how many production rules define a single meme(plex). If we call a
religion or a scientific theory a meme, it is clear that this will encompass a very large
number of interconnected rules. In practice it will be impossible to enumerate all rules, or
to define sharp boundaries between the rules that belong to the meme and those that do
not. For example, should you believe in the existence of Hell, the creation of the world in
seven days, and the virginity of Mary to be called a Catholic?
A pragmatic criterion that can be used in this regard is to define a meme or
memeplex as the smallest collection of propositions or memory items that tends to
replicate as a whole (cf. Wilkins, 1998). For example, a proposition like “God is
omnipotent” on its own, without specification of God’s other characteristics, is much too
abstract to be clearly understood or applied, and as such is unlikely to replicate well.
However, in combination with a number of other propositions, like “God is good”, “God
is the creator of the world”, etc., that flesh out, apply, and support this abstract idea, the
package will make much more sense, and be more likely to be passed on to other
individuals. Similarly, the first three notes of a melody are unlikely to be remembered as
a unit, but the first eight, as in the beginning of Beethoven’s fifth symphony, may well
be.
It remains that often we can add or subtract a few production rules (such as the
virginity of Mary) from a memeplex without significantly changing its chances of
replication. Therefore, in practice it will rarely be possible to determine the precise
boundaries of a meme(plex). However, this should not detract us from considering
memes while analyzing cultural evolution. Indeed, the same problem besets genetic
models of biological evolution: as yet, it is in practice impossible to specify the exact
combination of DNA codons that determine the gene for, say, fair skin, big ears or
altruism. The biochemical definition of a gene as a string of DNA that codes for one
protein is not very useful when studying evolution, since most practical functions require
a combination of proteins, most proteins exhibit a combination of functions, and much of
the DNA is non-coding, but therefore not necessarily useless, as it may contain control
information that determines the activation of other DNA strings.
As Dawkins (1989) notes, we do not need to know the constitutive elements or
boundaries of a gene in order to explain the evolution of particular characteristics, such as
altruism or fair skin, for which such a gene would be responsible. It is sufficient that we
can distinguish the effects of that gene from the effects of its rival genes (alleles). If we
can determine the fitness differences resulting from these effects, then we can make
predictions about which type of genes will win the competition in a particular situation,
and thus which characteristics the species is most likely to evolve. For example, knowing
that people with lighter skin need less sunlight to produce sufficient vitamin D, we can
predict that in Northern regions natural selection will favor genes for light skin over
genes for dark skin—whatever DNA codons make up these respective genes.
The same applies to memes. If, for example, we observe that one meme (say
Catholicism) induces its carriers to have more children than its competitors (say
Anglicanism), and that the children tend to take over their memes from their parents,
then, all other things being equal, we can predict that after sufficient time this meme will
10
dominate in the population. This prediction does not require any explicit definition of the
meme of Catholicism, but only the ability to distinguish it from its competitors. Of
course, in practice it is never the case that all other things are equal, but that is the
predicament of all scientific modeling: we must always simplify, and ignore potentially
important influences. The question is to do that as wisely as possible, and to maximally
include relevant variables without making the model too complex.
Dynamics of meme replication and spread
To be replicated, a meme must pass successfully through four subsequent stages:
1) assimilation by an individual, who thereby becomes a carrier or host of the meme;
2) retention in that individual's memory;
3) expression by the individual in language, behavior, or another form that can be
perceived by others;
4) transmission of the thus created message or mediotype to one or more other
individuals.
This last stage is followed again by stage 1, thus closing the replication loop. At each
stage there is selection, meaning that some memes will be eliminated. Let us look in more
detail at the mechanisms governing these four stages.
Assimilation
A successful meme must be able to “infect” a new host, that is, enter into its memory, and
thus acquire its memotype form. Let us assume that a meme is presented to a potential
new host. “Presented” means either that the individual encounters an existing mediotype
form of a meme, or that he or she independently discovers the meme, by observation of
outside phenomena or by thought, i.e. recombination of existing cognitive elements. To
be assimilated, the presented meme must be respectively noticed, understood and
accepted by the host. Noticing requires that the mediotype be sufficiently salient to attract
the host's attention. Understanding means that the host recognizes the meme as something
that fits in with his or her cognitive system. The mind is not a blank slate on which any
idea can be impressed. To be understood, a new idea or phenomenon must connect to
cognitive structures that are already available to the individual. Finally, a host that has
understood a new idea must also be willing to believe it or to take it seriously. For
example, although you are likely to understand the proposition that your car was built by
little green men from Mars, you are unlikely to accept that proposition without very
strong evidence. Therefore, you will in general not memorize it, and the meme will not
manage to infect you.
Retention
The second stage of memetic replication is the retention of the meme in memory. The
longer the meme stays, the more opportunities it will have to spread further by infecting
other hosts. This is Dawkins's (1989) longevity characteristic for replicators.
11
Just like assimilation, retention is characterized by strong selection, which few
memes will survive. Indeed, most of the things we hear, see or understand during the day
are not stored in memory for longer than a few hours. Although you may have clearly
assimilated the news that the national party won the Swaziland elections with 54% of the
votes, you are unlikely to remember this a week later—unless you live in Swaziland,
perhaps. Retention will depend on how important the idea is to you, and how often it is
repeated, either by recurrent encounter or by internal rehearsal.
Expression
To be communicated to other individuals, a meme must emerge from its storage as
memory pattern or memotype and enter its mediotype phase, i.e. assume a physical shape
that can be perceived by others. This process may be called “expression”. The most
obvious medium for expression is speech. Other common means are text, pictures,
behavior, and the creation of artifacts such as tools, buildings or works of art. Expression
does not require the conscious decision of the host to communicate the meme. A meme
can be expressed simply by the way somebody walks or manipulates an object, or by
what he or she wears.
Some retained memes will never be expressed, for example because the host does
not consider the meme interesting enough for others to know, uses it unconsciously
without it showing up in his or her behavior, does not know how to express it, or wants to
keep it secret. On the other hand, the host may be convinced that the meme is so
important that it must be expressed again and again to everybody he or she meets.
Transmission
To reach another individual, an expression needs a physical carrier or medium that is
sufficiently stable to transmit the expression without too much loss or deformation.
Speech, for example, uses sound to transmit an expression, while text will be transmitted
through ink on paper or electrical impulses in a wire. The expression will take the form of
a physical signal, modulating the carrier into a specific shape—the mediotype—from
which the original meme can be re-derived. For example, mediotypes can be books,
photographs, artifacts or CD-ROMs.
Selection at the transmission stage happens through either elimination of certain
memes, when the mediotype is destroyed or gets corrupted before it is perceived by
another individual, or through differential multiplication, when the mediotype is
reproduced into many copies. For example, a manuscript may be put into the shredder or
turned into a book that is printed in millions of copies. Especially since the emergence of
mass media and mass manufacturing, the transmission stage is the one where the contrast
between successful and unsuccessful memes is largest, and where selection can have the
largest impact.
12
Meme fitness
The overall survival rate of a meme m can be expressed as the meme fitness F(m), which
measures the expected number N(m) of memes at the next time step or generation t+1
divided by the average number of memes at the present time t. This fitness can be
expressed in a simplified model as the product of the survival/multiplication rates for
each of the four stages, respectively assimilation A, retention R, expression E and
transmission T:F(m) ! N(m, t + 1)
N(m, t) = A(m). R(m). E(m).T (m)
A denotes the proportion of mediotypes encountered by the host that are assimilated. R
represents the proportion of these assimilated memes that are retained in memory.
Therefore, A ≤ 1, R ≤ 1. E is the number of times a retained meme is expressed by the
host. T is the number of potential new hosts reached by a copy of the expression. Unlike
A and R, E and T do not have an upper bound, although E is likely to be more restricted
than T. Note that F is zero as soon as one of its components (A, R, E, T) is zero. This
expresses the fact that a meme must successfully pass through all four stages in order to
replicate. Also note that for a meme to spread (F > 1), you must have at least E > 1 or
T > 1.
Dynamics of spread
From the standard definition of fitness F, we can derive the rate of growth for the number
N(t) of meme copies at time t. This determines the speed with which the meme spreads
through the population of carriers:dN
dt ! N(t + 1) " N(t)
1 = (F " 1).N
This results in a traditional exponential growth if F > 1, exponential decay (and eventual
extinction) if F < 1, and stability if F = 1. This model is too simple if the population is
finite. In that case, we need to take into account the total size of the population of
potential carriers K, which functions as the “carrying capacity” of the socio-cultural
environment in which a meme proliferates. The increase in the number N(t) of memes
can be represented by the following Verhulst type of equation:dN
dt = (F ! 1).N(1 ! N
K )
This equation expresses the fact that the growth in meme number (dN) is in first instance
proportional to the number (N) that is already there—since more memes produce more
copies of themselves—, but eventually limited by the number K of potential hosts in the
population, so that growth becomes zero when the population reaches this limit (N = K).
13
The function N(t) that is the solution to this differential equation is the logistic function
with its characteristic sigmoid (S-like) shape.
Interactions between memes
The dynamics of a single growing meme population N(m) could be extended to several
interacting memes Ni = N(mi). Here we should add an interaction term Aij which describes
the strength of the influence of meme i on meme j. This influence can be positive
(Aij > 0), which means that an increase in i produces an increase in j, i.e. i helps j to grow.
A negative influence (Aij < 0) means that the growth of i suppresses the growth of j. A
neutral relation (Aij = 0) means that the spread of the one does not influence the spread of
the other. This applies to memes from independent domains, such as “God exists” and
“apples are healthy”. If we now consider the reciprocal influence (Aji), we can distinguish
the following specific types of interaction:
• Aij > 0, Aji > 0: the memetic species i and j can be seen as mutualists, that help
each other to spread, e.g. by reinforcing each others’ message. An example could
be “God is good” and “God is great”.
• Aij < 0, Aji < 0: i and j are rivals or competitors (Best, 1997): an increase in the one
produces a decrease in the other. Examples are “God is good” and “God does not
exist”.
• Aij > 0, Aji < 0: i and j stand in a predator-prey type of relationship, i.e. i grows at
the expense of j. This may happen when i (e.g. relativity theory) is a more
advanced version of j (e.g. Newtonian mechanics), so that carriers of j would
quickly convert to i, but non-carriers of j would be more difficult to convince of
i’s value.
The overall dynamics can be represented by the following system of non-linear
differential equations:dNi
dt = Ni .( Aij Nj
j
! + Bi )
Aii, the influence of meme i on itself will here normally always be negative and equal to
(1 – Fi)/K, while Bi = Fi -1, as in the previous equation for a single meme. Such
dynamical models quickly become very complex to solve, but are not fundamentally
different from traditional growth and competition models used in population biology,
epidemiology, or studies of the diffusion of innovations (Rogers, 2003). However, they
do not take into account the dependence of a meme on its carrier, nor the specific
communication channels between carriers.
Social structures
One way to make the model more realistic without adding too much complication is to
consider the structure of the social space in which the potential carriers of a meme reside.
Here we make the additional assumption of continuity, namely that a meme cannot jump
14
from one carrier to another without there being some form of proximity or relationship
between the carriers.
Horizontal transmission and the evolution of cooperation
The simplest form of relationship is the one between parents and their offspring. Parent-
to-child transmission (or more generally transmission between generations) is called
vertical transmission (Cavalli-Sforza & Feldman, 1981). Memes belonging to domains
such as religion, language, ethics, and general culture are commonly transmitted in this
way. This form of propagation is analogous to the transmission of genes. Therefore
“vertical” models of cultural evolution find results similar to those of biological
evolution. This means that vertically transmitted memes, such as established religions,
will typically reinforce or elaborate genetically transmitted behavioral patterns and thus
directly contribute to biological fitness (Cullen, 1999).
The same does not apply to horizontally transmitted culture, i.e. memes
exchanged between members of the same generation (Cavalli-Sforza & Feldman, 1981).
Here what is good for a meme (e.g. slavish imitation of fads and fashions) is not
necessarily good for the biological individual or gene pool, since genes and memes are
subjected to different kinds of natural selection. This may promote the evolution of
parasitic memes that are deleterious to their carriers, as we will discuss further.
However, in addition to the fact that it spreads new information more quickly,
horizontal transmission also offers another benefit that vertical transmission lacks. A
classic problem in biological evolution is the evolution of cooperation (Dawkins, 1989;
Heylighen & Campbell, 1995): given that genes are selected to promote their own good,
with a disregard or even hostility toward any rivals that compete for their scarce
resources, how can we explain cooperative or altruistic behavior where an individual
invests more in helping another than in his or her own good? In the animal world, cases
of altruism, such as among social insects, are usually explained via kin selection:
individuals will help others as long as these are related to them, i.e. share their genes. In
human society, however, people often help strangers that are totally unrelated. The
initially proposed explanation of group selection, namely that groups of individuals that
help each other survive better than groups of selfish individuals, has the shortcoming that,
within altruist groups, it are the selfish profiteers that do best, and thus spread their genes
most (Dawkins, 1989).
Horizontal transmission of cooperation norms solves this problem, since the
members of a cultural group are all memetically related to each other, sharing their
memes rather than their genes. Therefore, cultural kin selection will extend to all
members of the group (Evers, 1998). This entails a selective pressure for memes to
support the fitness of the whole group of their carriers, e.g. by promoting cooperation.
Moreover, selfish profiteers will not be able to undermine the cooperation produced by
such altruism-promoting memes because of conformist pressure (Boyd & Richerson,
1985; Heylighen & Campbell, 1995), or what we have called “winner-takes-all”: when
one meme establishes a majority position it will eventually get imposed on all members
of the group, thus suppressing the appearance of selfish dissidents—or at least not
allowing them to make any converts and thus spread their memes. This cultural solution
to the cooperation paradox in biological evolution appears to have been developed more
15
or less independently by different meme theorists (Boyd & Richerson, 1985; Heylighen,
1992; Evers, 1998; Blackmore, 2000).
Topologies of communication
Horizontal transmission will generally follow existing social or geographical topologies.
This can be modeled in two different ways:
1) individuals are situated in a space (typically a two-dimensional plane, or its
discrete equivalent, a two-dimensional lattice of cells);
2) individuals are considered as nodes in a (social) network, which are connected by
ties of acquaintance or trust.
The basic assumption in these models is that memes diffuse continuously across the space
or network. This means that, in first instance, communications are considered to be local,
i.e. agents exchange memes only with their direct neighbors in the space or social
network. The neighbor can pass on the meme to its neighbors, and so on, so that a meme
eventually may spread across the whole population.
When a population consists of different clusters or local communities, that have
little communication with each other, this will typically lead to different cultures
establishing themselves in different communities (Boyd & Richerson, 1985; Axelrod,
1997). The reason is that intense communication within each community will produce a
“winner-takes-all” dynamics where by chance or local adaptation one of several variant
memes becomes dominant. Memes from other communities, however, will only rarely be
encountered, so that they will generally not receive enough reinforcement to displace the
established memes.
Recent research in complex networks, including social networks, has shown that
such networks commonly have a scale-free structure (Albert & Barabasi, 2002). This
means that a few agents, the so-called “hubs” of the network, have a great many social
ties, while most agents only have a few links. The implication for cultural diffusion is
that memes hosted by “hub” agents will have a disproportionately large effect, and are
much more likely to spread widely. A similar effect has been observed in the spread of
sexually transmitted diseases, such as AIDS, where the infection of a few hubs in the
network (in this case individuals with a large number of sexual partners) may make the
difference between a large-scale epidemic and a few isolated infections. This observation
has provided inspiration to researchers in “viral” marketing, who look for methods to
make publicity for a brand or product by creating a “buzz”, i.e. a positive message about
their product that is propagated via word-of-mouth (Marsden & Kirby, 2005; Marsden,
1998). Their strategies focus on identifying and targeting the “opinion-leaders” within a
community, i.e. those central individuals that many know and tend to imitate.
Although it is in principle possible to make analytical models of the propagation
of memes across space or across networks, calculating the precise spread in a realistic
environment is far too difficult. Therefore, these processes are typically explored via
multi-agent computer simulations.
16
Computer simulations of cultural evolution
Cultural transmission of rules, norms or information is a common ingredient in many
social simulations (e.g. Bura, 1994; Axelrod, 1997; Doran, 1998; Hales, 1998; Flentge,
Polani & Uthmann, 2001), that are based on an “artificial society” of interacting software
agents (Epstein & Axtell, 1996). However, such memetic propagation is often added
merely as one of the many assumptions within a complicated model of a specific type of
socio-cultural evolution, such as the evolution of a shared vocabulary (Steels, 1998) or of
cooperation norms (Hales, 1998). There have been relatively few simulations that have
explored cultural evolution in the broadest sense. We will now discuss some typical
examples that illustrate the wider issue.
Probably the first explicitly memetic simulation, Meme and Variations, was made
by Gabora (1995, first written 1992). The assumptions underlying this, and related
simulations of cultural diffusion (e.g. Denaro & Parisi, 1996; Baldassarre & Parisi, 1999),
are the following: agents search the best solution for a particular problem. They can
either find a solution on their own through trial-and-error, or they can take over a solution
from another agent, by observing the solutions each of their neighbors has found and
imitating the best one. The result of the simulation is that the agents collectively find the
best solutions if they partially imitate others, partially explore individually. If they only
imitate, there is no creativity and the best solution cannot be improved. If they only
explore individually, lots of search is needed to merely rediscover what was already
known elsewhere. In the ideal situation, which is achieved by trying out different
parameter values for the simulation until one has found the optimal mix of innovation and
imitation, good solutions will spread very quickly throughout the population, but this
without preventing the discovery of even better solutions by certain agents.
This simulation investigated the relative effectiveness of, and interaction between,
individual learning and cultural diffusion. An older classic simulation (Hinton &
Nowlan, 1987) investigated the relative effectiveness of, and interaction between,
individual learning and genetic evolution. Inspired by this work, Best (1999) studied the
three-way interactions between individual learning, genetic evolution, and cultural
evolution. In Best’s simulation, agents can acquire knowledge that allows them to
maximize their fitness in three ways: 1) by inheriting it, possibly with variations, from
their parents (vertical, genetic transmission); 2) by copying it from another, fitter agent
(horizontal, cultural transmission); 3) by individually discovering it via trial-and-error.
The simulation showed that cultural transmission, just like individual learning, can
enhance genetic evolution, accelerating its convergence to the optimal solution.
Moreover, cultural transmission appeared superior to individual learning in that it
produced convergence more quickly.
Best (1999) also examined the situation in which cultural and genetic evolution
pursue opposite goals, and found that in this case genetic evolution normally wins the
competition. However, Bull, Holland & Blackmore (2001) further investigated this
situation by allowing cultural evolution to be much more rapid than genetic evolution, as
is normally the case. They found that under these conditions memetic effects are stronger
than genetic effects, and the only way genes can still keep some control over the process
is by evolving mechanisms to filter out particularly harmful memes.
These simulations of cultural evolution are still rather simplistic, in the sense that
agents literally copy any knowledge exhibited by a fitter agent. In practice, individuals do
17
not a priori know which individual is fitter, and when they receive a message, this
information will interact with the knowledge they already had. Van Overwalle &
Heylighen (2006) have proposed a more realistic simulation model in which agents do
not just copy a message, but actively “reinterpret” it, based on their previous experience.
Agents are modeled as simple neural networks that learn from experience. A message
corresponds to a pattern of activation over the nodes in such a network, and
communication to the spread of that activation from agent to agent via variable inter-
agent connections. The strength of the connection between two agents represents the
degree of trust of the one in the information received from the other. This trust is learned
on the basis of the degree to which information received previously from that agent is
confirmed by own knowledge. Unlike most multi-agent simulations, the Van Overwalle
& Heylighen (2006) model is supported by solid empirical evidence, in that it manages to
accurately reproduce the results of several classic communication experiments, including
the Lyons & Kashima (2001, 2003) study of meme transmission that we will discuss in a
later section.
Selection Criteria for Memes
Since mathematical models and computer simulations of meme spread necessarily have
to make plenty of simplifying assumptions, and cannot incorporate all the specific social,
psychological, linguistic and cultural factors that influence the propagation of a meme,
they are not very useful in predicting which concrete memes will be successful and which
will not. Yet, such predictions are necessary if we want to arrive at an empirically
testable theory, which can be applied to practical problems. One way to arrive at a more
practical, predictive model is to formulate general selection criteria that distinguish fitter
memes from less fit ones. All other things being equal, a meme that scores better on one
of these criteria is predicted to become more numerous than a meme that scores worse.
This is a falsifiable hypothesis that can be tested through experiments or observations. It
suffices to operationalize the criteria so that satisfaction of a criterion can be objectively
measured.
Many authors have proposed criteria for memetic success, and a few (e.g.
Heylighen, 1993, 1997, 1998; Hale-Evans, 1995; Castelfranchi, 2001) have compiled
lists of such criteria. Since these proposals, while related, are all different, we need to
examine more clearly what is needed for a good list of criteria. First, such criteria should
be formulated to be as much as possible independent or non-overlapping, so that a piece
of information can vary along one dimension of evaluation without varying along the
others. Second, without becoming too restrictive, they should be defined as precisely,
concretely and unambiguously as possible, so that different observers using these criteria
can come to the same conclusions.
To illustrate the importance of these methodological considerations, let us review
some proposed criteria, and point to their shortcomings. For example, one might naively
propose that fit memes should be attractive to their receivers. While this is true in a
general sense, it helps us very little in operationalizing meme fitness, as we cannot say
what makes a meme attractive without becoming much more explicit about its properties.
A somewhat more sophisticated hypothesis may propose that good memes should be
communicable (Schaller, Conway & Tanchuk, 2002). Again, this is obviously correct, but
communicability has so many different aspects, depending on the meme itself, its
18
audience, the used medium, etc., that we might as well say that it simply should be a
good meme. A more specific criterion, used e.g. by (Heath, Bell & Sternberg, 2001), is
plausibility. The problem here is that people may use very different procedures to
estimate plausibility, e.g. by looking at the source of the information, the available
evidence for it, or their own previous experience.
We will here summarize the criteria proposed by Heylighen (1993, 1997, 1998),
which are based on an extensive review of relevant cognitive, social and communicative
mechanisms. At the most abstract level, there are three classes of entities that information
depends on: the object that it refers to, the subject who assimilates and remembers it, and
the communication process that is used to transmit it between subjects. These determine
three categories of selection criteria, objective, subjective and intersubjective:
Objective criteria
• Distinctiveness: information that refers to something precise, distinct or detailed,
can be confirmed more easily by observation
• Invariance: information that remains valid over a wide range of contexts or
situations, is more stable and broadly applicable
• Evidence: information that is supported by independent observations, is more
reliable
Subjective criteria
• Utility: information that is valuable or useful to its carrier is more likely to be
remembered and passed on
• Affectivity: information that provokes strong emotions is more likely to be
remembered and passed on: this typically stimulates instinctive reactions, such as
fear, desire or disgust (Heath, Bell & Stenberg, 2001).
• Coherence: the better information fits in with the knowledge that individuals
already have, the more easily they will understand and accept it (Thagard, 1998)
• Simplicity: short, simple messages are easier to assimilate, remember and transmit
• Novelty: information that is unexpected will attract more attention
• Repetition: repeated exposure to the same message helps it to be assimilated and
retained
Intersubjective criteria
• Publicity: the more effort an individual puts into spreading a message, the more
people will receive it
• Formality: messages formulated explicitly and unambiguously are less likely to
be misinterpreted
• Expressivity: information must be easy to express in a given language or medium
• Authority: an authoritative, trustworthy source of the information makes it more
likely to be accepted
• Conformity: information confirmed by many people is more easily accepted
(Boyd & Richerson, 1985)
• Collective utility: information, if adopted by a group, may help the group to
function better, and therefore to grow or function as a model for others. Examples
are standards, linguistic conventions, and traffic rules.
19
Parasitic memes
Memes being communicated undergo natural selection. Some memes are transmitted
easily, thus reaching a large number of people, while others are rejected, misunderstood,
forgotten or otherwise eliminated from circulation. This means that the memes best
adapted to the underlying cognitive and communicative processes will spread farthest.
We may assume that our brain, general culture, and social structures have evolved so as
to maximize the fitness of society and its members. This means that they should be good
at assimilating useful memes, and at rejecting bad ones (e.g. Blackmore, 2000). For
example, we know that we should not accept things without evidence, and that some
sources are more reliable than other. Insofar that these socio-cognitive guidelines, as
exemplified by the above list of selection criteria, efficiently filter out poor-quality
information, successful memes will also increase the fitness of their carriers.
However, since no system is foolproof, these mechanisms will not always be
reliable. This leaves a niche for memes to evolve that propagate well, apparently
satisfying the criteria that people intuitively use, but without delivering any benefit to
their carriers. We may call such memes selfish (Heylighen, 1992) or parasitic (cf. Cullen,
1999), as they free ride on the effort invested by individuals to gather and communicate
useful information. Such information parasites succeed by faking the criteria that we use
to recognize high-quality information. This is similar to the way many biological
organisms mimic other phenomena, such as viruses that mimic the cell's own DNA, so
that they are reproduced for free by the cellular machinery. Memes have therefore been
described as “mind viruses” (Dawkins, 1993; Brodie, 1996), since they similarly exploit
our cognitive machinery to get themselves replicated.
There are plenty of examples of such parasitic memes. Perhaps the most studied
from a memetic point of view are chain letters, whose only purpose is to have themselves
replicated and sent to as many people as possible (Goodenough & Dawkins, 2002;
Bennet, Li & Ma, 2003). A more modern variant are virus hoaxes (Chielens, 2003;
Chielens & Heylighen, 2005), i.e. email messages that warn the receivers for a non-
existent type of computer virus, and urge them to pass on this warning to as many people
as possible. Probably the most dangerous information parasites are certain religious cults
(Cullen, 1999), which indoctrinate their followers to make as many converts as possible,
while isolating them from alternative sources of information, so that they tend to develop
a view of reality that is so distorted that it may end fatally, as in the mass suicides of the
Heaven's Gate cult. Pseudosciences too can be dangerous, parading as solid scientific
theories, but asserting statements that at best are not supported by the facts, like in
astrology, at worst fatally wrong, like in certain quack cures for cancer. Somewhat more
benign are urban legends and various rumors and fads, which tend to spread in waves,
being passed on from person to person but without any authoritative source or real
evidence. Bangerter & Heath (2004) have tracked the evolution of one such legend, the
Mozart effect (i.e. the unfounded belief that babies listening to classical music become
more intelligent), starting from its source: a scientific experiment that merely found that
after listening to music adults temporarily scored better on certain tests—perhaps simply
because they were more relaxed.
20
Several memeticists (e.g. Dawkins, 1993; Brodie, 1996; Lynch, 1998) have
investigated the many tricks that memes use to appear more acceptable than they deserve
to be, including the following. Self-justification means that the components of a
memeplex mutually justify each other, but without independent support. An example is:
“God exists because the Bible says so”, and “You should believe the Bible because it is
the word of God”. Self-reinforcement means that a meme stimulates its host to rehearse
itself, e.g. by repeated study, meditation, prayer, etc. Intolerance means that a meme
indoctrinates its host to a priori reject any potentially competing memes. Proselytism
occurs when a meme urges its host to maximally spread the meme to other hosts, like in
the case of chain letters. Baiting occurs when a meme promises its carriers a reward if
they only accept and spread the meme. All these tactics are common in religious cults,
which promise their adherents that they will go to Heaven if they believe the teachings,
pray, and spread the word, while they will burn in Hell if they dare to doubt (Dawkins,
1993).
Parasitic memes have been the subject and inspiration of most empirical
approaches to memetics, since their spread is relatively easy to track, and since they are
prime illustrations of the way in which cultural evolution is fundamentally different from
genetic evolution.
Empirical Tests
Memetics has often been challenged and has known some very virulent critics. One of the
main criticisms is that there are no empirical data to back up the theories that were put
forth, and in that sense memetics is merely a way of thinking rather than a scientific
discipline (Edmonds, 2002; Gil-White, 2005; Greenberg, 2005). This criticism is to some
degree justifiable. The lack of a universally accepted meme definition and the vagueness
of meme boundaries (cf. Atran, 2001) indeed make empirical studies less evident. Yet,
there have already been a few empirical studies of meme propagation in different
condition, both in the laboratory (e.g. Lyons & Kashima, 2001, 2003) and in real life (e.g.
Goodenough & Dawkins, 2002; Bennet, Li & Ma, 2003; Chielens, 2003). More
generally, we must note that memetics is an approach that illuminates important aspects
of culture, society and communication that more traditional approaches, such as
sociology, psychology or history, tend to neglect. Empirical tests cannot confirm or
falsify this perspective as a whole, but merely specific implementations of it. This is
analogous to the observation that experiments in psychology or sociology can test
particular theories within their field, but not the field as such.
Within the memetics field, one simple way to test specific theories is by
considering the memetic selection criteria they imply (Chielens & Heylighen, 2005). We
can then measure the apparent success rate of different memes, and examine its
correlation with the degree to which the memes fulfill the proposed selection criteria.
Heath, Bell & Sternberg (2001) applied this approach to investigate the criteria of
affectivity (which they call emotional selection) and plausibility. From the affects, they
focused on disgust because this is a relatively simple emotion whose strength is easy to
measure. When comparing different urban legends that contained an element of disgust
(e.g. the story of a man who discovers a dead rat in the cola bottle he has just been
drinking from), they found that the more disgusting variations typically had spread more
21
widely than the less disgusting ones. The same applied to more plausible variations.
Chielens (2003) used a similar method to examine the spread of virus hoaxes. He used
both expert and non-expert surveys to score different hoaxes on different criteria,
including novelty, simplicity, utility, authority and proselytism. In this case, the spread of
the hoax correlated most strongly with its novelty. Schaller, Conway & Tanchuk (2002)
examined the correlation between the communicability of traits, i.e. the probability with
which subjects would speak about a particular trait, and the frequency of these traits.
They found that for traits used to describe different ethnic groups, the most
communicable traits are also the ones that are most widely spread and persistent in
society. Pocklington & Best (1997; Best 1997; 1998) used automatic text analysis to
measure how often a certain discussion subject was mentioned in a particular discussion
group on the net. They found evidence for memetic competition between mutually
incoherent subjects, meaning that an increase in the one correlated with a decrease in the
other.
While these studies merely observed existing patterns of spread, Lyons &
Kashima (2001, 2003) performed a laboratory experiment in which they deliberately
produced a memetic transmission chain. They created a fictional story and asked the
participants in the experiment to subsequently tell the story from person 1 to person 2,
from 2 to 3, and so one, like in the game of “telephone” or “Chinese Whispers”. The
story involved a fictitious tribe, the Jamayans, about which all participants had received
some background information. After several experiments, a statistical analysis of the
story elements that remained at the end of the transmission chain (i.e. as reported by the
last person to hear the story) found a number of systematic selection effects. These seem
to confirm four of the previously mentioned criteria:
1) coherence: elements inconsistent with the background information were more
likely to be left out;
2) novelty: elements that the speakers assumed were already known by the listeners
were more likely to be left out;
3) simplicity: details or embellishments that did not affect the story line tended to be
left out;
4) conformity: when the participants were told that the majority of them believed that
the Jamayans were, e.g., peaceful, they were more likely to leave out elements
inconsistent with this fact than if they thought that this was only a minority
opinion.
Experiments on memes “in the wild” are more difficult to control than in such a
laboratory situation. Because of ethical concerns it is hardly possible to release a well-
doctored meme upon the world to observe how it evolves. Another problem is that it is
hard to track memes once they are released. Even when feedback is asked or if
mechanical trackers are included in the meme (for example, images included in an email
message that are automatically downloaded from a controlled server each time the
message is opened), it is hard to see whether the meme has already been changed by the
time these devices are triggered.
In conclusion, empirical memetics research remains in its infancy. However,
experiments have already shown that it is possible to quantitatively confirm or falsify a
number of non-trivial memetic predictions. It is to be hoped that many more studies along
22
these lines will be carried out. As long as memetics has not been thoroughly investigated
empirically, it is likely to remain a theoretical niche framework used only for description
rather than prediction.
Future Directions
The theory of memetics and cultural evolution holds out great promises for a better
understanding, anticipation and control of fundamental social problems that depend on
the propagation of ideas and behaviors. This will require more extensive empirical
observations and tests, more detailed computer models of the interaction between memes
and their hosts, and a better conceptualization of what a meme precisely is. A first basic
result that should come out of such research is a concrete and reliable list of criteria that
characterize successful memes, i.e. ideas or cultural traits that propagate widely and
easily across large populations. This would allow us not only to recognize such memes,
but to some degree to design or improve them.
The ability to create successful memes is the Holy Grail of marketing research
(Godin, 2002), which is constantly on the look-out for techniques to create a “buzz” and
have their publicity message or brand name (Marsden, 2002; Marsden & Kirby, 2005)
become as widely known as possible. Another application of these principles lies in
public education. For example, if the government makes a campaign to convince people
to stop smoking, it would be very useful to have the campaign designed according to
sound memetic principles. This should take into account both the characteristics of the
message itself (e.g. being sufficiently simple and unambiguous), of the intended audience
(e.g. being consistent with what the audience already believes, while being sufficiently
novel to attract their attention), and of the way it is transmitted (e.g. having the meme
expressed in a common medium by people considered trustworthy).
Memetic selection criteria can be applied not only positively, to help spread a
beneficial idea, but negatively, to prevent or suppress harmful memes. Examples are the
idea that it is cool to smoke, false rumours and scares that may promote panic or
accentuate social prejudice, fundamentalist ideologies that incite hatred or terrorism, and
dangerous superstitions, such as the belief that you can cure AIDS by having sex with a
virgin. A better understanding of memetic dynamics may help us to understand how such
mind viruses arise and spread. It may moreover help us to “immunize” the population by
educating them about basic memetics, so as not to be misled by apparently plausible—
but fundamentally misleading—cults, fads and superstitions (Dawkins, 1993; Brodie,
1996).
Another basic result of future memetic research should be a complex dynamical
model of the interactions between individuals, groups, and the memes they carry. This
should allow making longer-term predictions about the interactions between different
groups and subcultures within our globalizing society. A crucial issue in this regard is
whether minority cultures will eventually be assimilated into the majority, or on the
contrary become polarized, asserting their divergent habits and beliefs ever more
forcefully (Axelrod, 1997; Van Overwalle & Heylighen, 2006). Two concrete examples
are minority languages, such as the Welsh still spoken in Britain, where there is a
tendency for the subculture to be slowly erased by the majority culture, and the culture of
Islamic immigrants in Europe, where there is a tendency towards polarization in the sense
23
of increased radicalism. Neither complete assimilation nor polarization are desirable
outcomes, but at first sight they seem like the most likely results of the “winner-takes-all”
dynamics created by the pressure to conform to the group one has most contact with. A
more detailed theory of cultural evolution may help us to find a middle way that
preserves cultural diversity without exacerbating conflicts, and to pinpoint the crucial
factors that can steer the dynamics in one direction rather than another.
24
