Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Annual Review of Psychology
Attitudes and Attitude Change
Dolores Albarracin and Sharon Shavitt
Department of Psychology and Department of Business Administration,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois 61822;
email: dalbarra@illinois.edu, shavitt@illinois.edu
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018. 69:299–327
First published as a Review in Advance on August
25, 2017
The Annual Review of Psychology is online at
psych.annualreviews.org
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-122216-
011911
Copyright c© 2018 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved
Keywords
attitude, persuasion, evaluative judgment, opinion, belief, goal, culture
Abstract
This review covers research on attitudes and attitude change published be-
tween 2010 and 2017. We characterize this period as one of significant
progress toward an understanding of how attitudes form and change in three
critical contexts. The first context is the person, as attitudes change in con-
nection to values, general goals, language, emotions, and human develop-
ment. The second context is social relationships, which link attitude change
to the communicator of persuasive messages, social media, and culture. The
third context is sociohistorical and highlights the influence of unique events,
including sociopolitical, economic, and climatic occurrences. In conclusion,
many important recent findings reflect the fact that holism, with a focus on
situating attitudes within their personal, social, and historical contexts, has
become the zeitgeist of attitude research during this period.
299
Click here to view this article's
online features:
• Download figures as PPT slides
• Navigate linked references
• Download citations
• Explore related articles
• Search keywords
ANNUAL
REVIEWS Further
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Attitude: a person’s
evaluation of an object
on a favorable to
unfavorable
continuum
Value: attitude
toward an abstract
entity
Contents
THE MEANING OF AND INTEREST IN ATTITUDES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 300
ATTITUDE CHANGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301
TOWARD A HOLISTIC UNDERSTANDING OF ATTITUDES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 304
The Person as Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 304
The Social Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 312
The Historical Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 314
CONCLUSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 319
THE MEANING OF AND INTEREST IN ATTITUDES
The study of attitudes is the study of evaluations, and it has been part of social psychology since
that field first emerged with Thomas & Znaniecki’s (1918–1920) The Polish Peasant in Europe and
America. The term attitude was initially used by Jung (1923) in his writing about psychological
types to describe a readiness to respond, a definition later incorporated by Allport (1935). However,
as there are no guarantees that, for example, liking a political candidate will yield support for that
candidate at the polls, overt behavioral responses are no longer part of the definition of attitudes.
Rather, the attitude–behavior relationship is best seen an empirical question outside the definition
of attitude, a definition that simply focuses on the evaluative nature of attitudes as favor or disfavor.
Attitudes have a subject matter (referred to as the object or target), which can be an object,
a person, or an abstract idea. Attitudes are thus relevant to many disciplines, including market-
ing (e.g., attitudes toward products), advertising (e.g., attitudes toward advertisements), political
behavior (e.g., attitudes toward political candidates, parties, or voting), and health (e.g., attitudes
toward protective behaviors, new medications, or the health system). Attitudes toward other peo-
ple are studied in the domain of interpersonal liking, attitudes toward the self in the domain of
self-esteem, and attitudes toward abstract ideas in the domain of values. Attitudes can be spe-
cific, or they can generalize across objects, with people holding attitudes that are either generally
positive or generally negative (Hepler & Albarrac´ın 2013). The contemporary representation of
a hater comes to mind when we consider general attitudes, which are dispositional evaluations
irrespective of the object.
Attitudes can be measured by simply asking respondents to report their attitudes or by inferring
attitudes from spontaneous evaluative reactions to the presentation of the attitude object (see Ehret
et al. 2015). Indirect measures of attitudes, referred to as implicit measures, are designed to assess
automatic evaluations that may be dissociated from the explicit, self-report measures but may
still predict behavior in some contexts (e.g., Sheets et al. 2011, Stanley et al. 2011). Although
the introduction of implicit measures has probably been the most notable change in attitude
research over the past two decades, interest in attitudes has remained fairly stable over time. A
search for research on attitudes in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology since its first
publication shows ongoing interest. Specifically, in an analysis of one issue in every five years
since the journal’s inception, a count of articles whose abstracts mention attitude, persuasion,
belief, opinion, or evaluative judgments reveals that such articles comprise a fairly steady 20% of
publications. As shown in Figure 1, there is sustained and long-standing scholarship in this area
over the course of no less than six decades.
Covering the vast field of attitudes within the space constraints of this review is a challenge. We
therefore make important choices, focusing on the literature published between 2010 and 2017,
300 Albarracin ·Shavitt
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:390.24
0.32
0.19 0.18
0.16
0.13
0.17
0.11
0.14
0.21
0.17
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
Year
Proportion
Figure 1
Proportion of articles in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology whose abstracts mention attitude,
persuasion, belief, opinion, or evaluative judgment.
Attitude change:
movement from one
evaluative category to
another (e.g., favor to
disfavor)
to continue where coverage ended in a previous Annual Review of Psychology article on attitudes and
attitude change (Bohner & Dickel 2011). We performed several systematic PsycINFO searches,
using attitude change as a keyword to search all psychological outlets and attitude as a keyword
to search social psychological outlets. We also conducted more targeted PsycINFO searches for
attitude and value, attitude and goal, attitude and emotion, attitude and metaphor, attitude and
language, attitude and source, and attitude and network. For areas with multidisciplinary appeal,
we searched Google Scholar and included other behavioral science outlets (e.g., in consumer
behavior). This review is intended to identify contributions about generational and developmental
effects on attitudes, historical effects on attitudes, and the cultural context of attitudes. Regrettably,
space constraints prohibit us from covering some important areas, including the vast literatures on
prejudice and on evolutionary influences on cognition and motivation, even though they sometimes
address attitudes and attitude change. We are confident that other reviews will fill these gaps.
ATTITUDE CHANGE
On our optimistic days, we assume that our children will enjoy cleaning their rooms and that
American citizens will support the right candidate and actually vote on election day. Likewise,
public policy makers continue to search for the optimal fear appeal to curb smoking, scientists
hope for representatives’ understanding and approval of research funding, and fundraisers seek
ways of increasing philanthropy and support for valuable causes. In other words, we all hope for
the right attitudes and count on attitude change and behavior in a myriad of socially relevant areas.
But what can we say about how much attitudes actually change?
One approach to addressing this question is conceptual: The degree of attitude change depends
on whether one adopts a theoretical conceptualization of attitudes as being crystallized in memory,
as in-the-moment evaluations, or as hybrid structures. When attitudes are defined as a fixed
memory, stored permanently for later retrieval when the opportunity and the need arise, change
is difficult to explain. When attitudes are defined as constructed based on temporary considerations,
such as the perceiver’s mood at a particular time (Schuldt et al. 2011), attitudes are always changing.
www.annualreviews.org • Attitudes and Attitude Change 301
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Most likely, attitudes are partly memory based and partly constructed on the fly (Albarracin et al.
2005), which would be consistent with a contemporary understanding of information processing
as a neural network in which activation patterns stem from situational constraints as well as chronic
connection weights (see Calanchini & Sherman 2013, van Bavel et al. 2012). This hybrid model
allows for attitude stability as well as change.
The second approach to degree of change is to answer the question asked by policy makers and
other stakeholders: If we measure attitudes at two points in time, how much of a difference will we
notice? All studies of attitude change are relevant to this question, with meta-analyses providing
appropriate estimates of average change in response to communications or interventions. Recent
research includes experiments designed to produce attitude change in the laboratory, as well as
interventions conducted in the field. The area of intergroup attitudes provides examples of how
much change we can expect. In laboratory studies, even simply imagining intergroup contact
appears to shift evaluations (Miles & Crisp 2014). A synthesis of research in which participants
were asked to imagine contact with an outgroup member revealed d = 0.36 for explicit attitudes
(U3 = 64%) and d = 0.31 for implicit attitudes (U3 = 62%) (Miles & Crisp 2014). These
results reveal that 14% of participants who imagined outgroup contact were likely to have more
positive explicit attitudes than those who did not imagine. Correspondingly, 12% of participants
who imagined outgroup contact were likely to have more positive implicit attitudes than those
who did not imagine.
A meta-analysis by Lemmer & Wagner (2015) focused on field interventions to reduce inter-
group conflict that introduced contact between two ethnic groups. This meta-analysis revealed
that, immediately after contact, approximately 61% of the participants in the interventions had
positive intergroup attitudes, versus 50% of those participants not having contact (d = 0.28,
U3 = 61%). Diversity training, often implemented in organizational settings, has similar effects
on attitudes (d = 0.23, U3 = 59%; Kalinoski et al. 2013). In conclusion, some attitude change is
possible even in domains that are traditionally resistant to change.
Many programs designed for the real world pursue changes in behavior and often do not
measure changes in attitudes. However, a recent meta-analysis (Tyson et al. 2014) assessed atti-
tude change in response to interventions to reduce risky sexual behavior both immediately after
the intervention and following a delay. Regardless of the time of assessment, the effect of the
interventions was d = 0.257, which implies that 60% of the recipients experienced change fol-
lowing the intervention, versus 50% in the absence of an intervention. Another meta-analysis
(Steinmetz et al. 2016) was conducted to measure the average effect of interventions designed
on the basis of the theory of planned behavior (Ajzen & Madden 1986) and yielded similar
conclusions. The domains of these programs varied greatly. Of the interventions, 33% tar-
geted physical activity, 19% nutrition, 16% work or study issues (e.g., ergonomic behaviors,
stress management), 11% alcohol and drug use, 8% adherence to medical regimens, 7% driv-
ing behavior, 4% sexual behavior, and 2% hygiene. On average, these programs were associ-
ated with a d = 0.24 for attitude change, an effect size that can be visualized by thinking that
59% of intervention recipients were likely to have more positive attitudes relative to 50% of the
nonrecipients.
Research conducted in the laboratory can often obtain stronger effects than field studies for
several reasons, including better control of distraction and reduced random error. During the past
few years, a synthesis of experimental research on fear appeals was conducted to demonstrate the
extent to which fear could lead to attitude, intention, and behavior change (Tannenbaum et al.
2015). In this synthesis, the researchers compared messages designed to induce a high level of
fear in such diverse areas as health, financial decisions, and driving safety. The results for attitudes
showed an average change of d = 0.20 (U3 = 57%).
302 Albarracin ·Shavitt
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39All in all, attitude change based on interventions or messages delivered at a particular time
hovers around d = 0.22, which is a small effect. However, this change may, in some cases, be
quite durable, as beliefs and attitudes have been known to persist despite attempts at correction (for
a recent treatment of these issues, see Chan et al. 2017). Motivated cognition suggests that attitudes
and beliefs that are consistent with other values are likely to persist. Defensive cognitive processes
can be recruited to protect the attitudes and beliefs, particularly when accuracy motivation is low
(Hart et al. 2009), and people set high thresholds of evidence to refute cherished points of view
(Hart et al. 2009). Belief persistence, however, obeys other mechanisms, as well. For example,
Ecker and colleagues (2014) introduced the belief that the suspect of a crime scenario was an
Australian Aboriginal. The degree of later correction of this information, however, was unrelated
to prejudice, suggesting the involvement of nonmotivational processes. Moreover, initial beliefs
persist more when people generate reasons why the initial information is true but correspondingly
less when they generate reasons why alternate scenarios might be true (Chan et al. 2017). A mental
model of reasoning (Chan et al. 2017) details how people construct a web of mental models
from which they derive causal conclusions. New information tends to produce new or extended
models of explanation without leading people to discard key information not explained by the
new model (Chan et al. 2017). Therefore, effective corrections must provide a causal alternative
to fully explain mental models. For example, effective corrections of climate change denial must
account for random variability in temperature in addition to introducing fossil fuel burning as the
explanation for systematic temperature increases ( Jamieson & Hardy 2014).
Attitudes are of particular concern in the area of climate change, where scholars and practi-
tioners are investigating the potential for reducing climate change denial. Recent research has
wrestled with the irony of strong extant climatological evidence accompanied by public disbelief
and denial (Mercier 2016, Mercier & Sperber 2011). Naturally, cultural representations can be
slow to align with scientific evidence, but progress has been made in other areas, including public
acceptance of the health dangers of smoking (Ranney & Clark 2016). An apparent roadblock to
aligning attitudes with scientific evidence is difficulties in teaching audiences about the mecha-
nisms of global warming. In a series of experiments (Ranney & Clark 2016), participants were
instructed about climate change mechanisms and completed measures of knowledge and beliefs
before and after the instruction. Effects on knowledge were easy to obtain in most areas and were
also large following instruction about climate change mechanisms (Ranney & Clark 2016). Belief
change was also quite large, with 99% of the participants accepting climate change postinstruction
relative to 50% preinstruction (Ranney & Clark 2016, experiment 2; U3 = 99). Of course, this
is a relatively simple belief change, as opposed to the aforementioned attempts at changing more
complex intergroup attitudes or health behaviors.
A sustained interest in the study of implicit attitudes has generated fascinating demonstrations
of the effects of unique and historic events. The election of Barack Obama to the US presidency
was such an event and provided the perfect natural experiment for the study of implicit racial
attitudes as a function of media display of a Black person occupying a high-status position (Roos
et al. 2013). This work was conducted in the United States and in Canada, assuming differential
media coverage and, therefore, differential attitude change following the 2008 election (Roos
et al. 2013). Implicit attitudes were measured using evaluative priming, a procedure that connects
spontaneous activation of positive versus negative concepts to a stimulus—in this case, Black and
White faces. Our calculation of the degree of change the authors observed in the United States
reveals d = 0.55 and Cohen’s U3 = 71%. This sizable effect implies that US implicit attitudes
toward Blacks were 21% more positive after the election than before it.
Changes in implicit attitudes are promising, although still not an assurance of changes in
behavior. In particular, a meta-analysis of implicit attitudes as predictors of behavior revealed an
www.annualreviews.org • Attitudes and Attitude Change 303
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39average correlation r of 0.15 or 0.12 for racial and intergroup attitudes (Oswald et al. 2015). These
attitudes were measured using the implicit association test (Greenwald et al. 2015), developed and
refined in prior decades with the goal of circumventing social desirability concerns and the common
reluctance to express prejudicial attitudes. Although earlier estimates of these associations were
only moderately higher (r = 0.24 and r = 0.20 for racial and intergroup attitudes, respectively;
Greenwald et al. 2009), the recent low associations suggest minimally consequential changes, at
least with the current measurement instruments (Oswald et al. 2015; see also Greenwald et al.
2015). Cameron et al. (2012), Galdi et al. (2012), and Meissner & Rothermund (2013) provide
analyses of other implicit measures.
TOWARD A HOLISTIC UNDERSTANDING OF ATTITUDES
The longstanding research interest in attitudes has uncovered many details about the cognitive and
motivational processes of attitude formation, attitude change, attitude–behavior correspondence,
and persuasion. A careful look at the most recent work brings to light some qualitative changes in
the scientific agenda in recent years, i.e., a shift from a focus on microprocesses to a more holistic,
contemporary understanding of attitudes as they exist in three fundamental contexts: (a) the person
as a whole, in relation to values, broad goals, language, emotions, other attitudes, and the lifespan;
(b) the social context, including communicators, as well as social media and social networks; and
(c) the broad context, particularly the sociohistorical context, in relation to the generational,
cultural, and historical backdrop of attitudes.
The Person as Context
The first context is that of the person as a whole. In this section, we consider the powerful role of
a person’s values, general goals, emotions, linguistic processes, evaluative processes, life span and
developmental aspects, and temporal and spatial context in shaping their attitudes and persuasion
processes.
The context of values. Attitude scholars have traditionally had an interest in values, defined
as attitudes toward abstract entities. For instance, a person with universalist values probably has
a favorable attitude toward policies that foster equality; a person with security values is likely
to favor policies that assure safety and stability in their environment. These values exist within
a motivational structure that often links values to support for particular policies (e.g., Schwartz
et al. 2012), although the influence of values is often tempered by other considerations. Over the
past several years, interest in values has burgeoned.
A series of recent experiments (Wolsko et al. 2016) has provided a compelling demonstration of
how linking a specific advocacy to broad values can shift attitudes toward a policy. When it comes
to environmental attitudes, liberals see damage to the environment as an injustice, which easily
connects with liberals’ preoccupation with harm and care. Media messages about environmental
issues advocate these values, which leaves these communications in a situation of preaching to the
choir while neglecting the unconverted (Feinberg & Willer 2013, Wolsko et al. 2016). Wolsko
and colleagues (2016) designed a series of studies crossing liberal and conservative ideologies with
environmental messages that appealed to either individualizing or binding morals. Individualizing
values include concern about caring, nurturing, and protecting vulnerable individuals from harm.
For instance, a statement of individualizing values might be, “Show your love for all of humanity
and the world in which we live by helping to care for our vulnerable natural environment” (Wolsko
et al. 2016, p. 9). Binding values involve ingroup loyalty, authority, respect, and purity or sanctity.
304 Albarracin ·Shavitt
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Norm: shared societal
or situational
expectations that can
shape attitudes and
guide behavior
For instance, a statement of binding values might be, “Show you love your country by joining the
fight to protect the purity of America’s natural environment” (Wolsko et al. 2016, p. 9).
The results from four experiments converged on the conclusion that liberals had equally strong
intentions toward conservation regardless of the type of appeal they received. In contrast, con-
servatives had stronger intentions after receiving the binding message than after receiving either
the individualizing message or a control message. Attitudes toward climate change were also mea-
sured by asking participants to rate statements such as, “The seriousness of climate change is
exaggerated.” As with intentions, the attitudes of liberals were similarly in favor of policies to
counter climate change in the individualizing, binding, and control conditions alike. The attitudes
of conservatives, however, were more positive in the binding condition than in the individualizing
or control conditions.
Within the spectrum of conservative ideology, the influence of values on attitudes appears to
interact with prevailing social norms. Research conducted by Oyamot et al. (2012) considered this
possibility in a large experiment conducted via a phone survey of a diverse US sample. Authoritarian
upbringing was gauged by endorsement of respect and obedience (versus independence and self-
reliance). Attitudes toward immigrants were measured with reports of feelings toward legal immi-
grants, which correlated negatively with authoritarian upbringing. Furthermore, participants were
informed that Americans’ feelings were generally positive, mixed, or negative toward immigrants—
a manipulation of social norms. The effects of these norms on attitudes depended not only on
authoritarian upbringing but also on participants’ current level of humanitarian values, measured
with items such as, “Those who are unable to provide for their basic needs should be helped by
others.” Among participants reporting a more authoritarian upbringing, those with more human-
itarian values exposed to the mixed norm reported more liking for immigrants than in the other
conditions. Participants with authoritarian upbringing, however, reported more dislike for immi-
grants when exposed to the negative norm. Overall, then, humanitarian values attenuated xeno-
phobic attitudes when the norm was mixed but increased xenophobia when the norm was negative.
Just as certain values modulate the impact of conservative social norms, values can also govern
the impact of conservative advocacies. In particular, egalitarian values are often invoked to oppose
affirmative action policies that recommend paying attention to traditionally underrepresented
groups in educational and work settings. Therefore, invoking these values can increase the per-
suasiveness of communications condemning affirmative action. Research conducted by Blakenship
et al. (2012) has shown that general messages about the value of equality were more successful at
decreasing support for affirmative action than were messages directly attacking affirmative action.
Furthermore, when values were easily accessible from memory, highlighting them had little effect.
However, when values were not easily accessible, bringing them to mind decreased acceptance of
affirmative action policies (Blankenship et al. 2015).
Both self-interest values and moral values can legitimize attitudes and make it subjectively
appropriate to act on those attitudes (Miller & Effron 2010). One basis for this legitimacy is the
personal relevance of an issue. For example, gay marriage is personally relevant to gays and lesbians
who are likely to experience direct consequences from the policy. In addition, moral values can
legitimize action independently of material self-interest (Effron & Miller 2012). In line with a
moral legitimacy effect, participants reported feeling more comfortable taking action on policies
that were not materially relevant to them (e.g., pro-choice issues for males) when they moralized
the issue (Effron & Miller 2012).
Even though moral values and material self-interest can both guide attitudes, the relative weight
of each interest type can be impacted by temporal distance. A persuasive message presented to
non-White college students announced a reduction of financial aid for minority students (Hunt
et al. 2010). The students were told that reduction would either take effect immediately or be
www.annualreviews.org • Attitudes and Attitude Change 305
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39General action goal:
effortful end state that
can be satisfied by
various cognitive and
physical behavioral
means
implemented a year later, thus varying temporal distance to be either short or long. Self-interest was
measured as financial strain, and values were measured as social dominance orientation. According
to construal level theory (Wakslak et al. 2007), psychological distance alters the basis for decisions.
When considering imminent decisions, concrete, material considerations receive more weight. In
contrast, when considering delayed situations, abstract considerations receive more weight. As
predicted, when the policy was to be effective immediately, material self-interest was the primary
motivation for opposing the policy. However, when the policy was less imminent, political values
were the primary driver of the opposition.
Abstract values are appropriate guides for attitudes in a number of contexts. Research conducted
in Brazil, New Zealand, and South Africa provided a unique demonstration of the value-to-attitude
pathways, as well as the fact that attitudes act as partial mediators of the influence of values on
behavior (Milfont et al. 2010). Across countries, self-interest values predicted negative attitudes
toward environmental issues, whereas altruistic values predicted favorable attitudes toward en-
vironmental issues. These attitudes had a moderate association with environmental behavior, an
association that included the indirect effect of altruistic (but not self-interest) values. Overall, then,
this work is another demonstration that attitudes are embedded within a network of values that
must be taken into account to understand the influence of attitudes on behavior.
The context of goals. Attitudes can be brought to mind in the service of action goals, as in
the case when considering a behavioral goal reminds us of what we like and dislike about the
execution and outcomes of the behavior. General action and inaction goals are a particular type of
overly general goal that have received research attention in the past few years. General action has
been defined as motor or cognitive output, and general inaction has been defined as the lack of
action (Albarrac´ın & Handley 2011, Albarrac´ın et al. 2008). The action end of the action–inaction
continuum comprises intense or frequent motor and cognitive behavior, whereas the inaction end
comprises neither motor nor cognitive behavior (e.g., non-REM sleep). The action end includes
important, well-planned, effortful behaviors such as acquiring knowledge, as well as seemingly
undemanding behaviors such as eating when food is present. General action and general inaction
can be set to guide people toward activity or inactivity end-states, respectively, which are, in turn,
achieved by temporarily accessible or chronically available behavioral means. These action and
inaction goals have important implications for attitude activation and change.
In research conducted by Albarrac´ın & Handley (2011), experimental participants primed
with general action or inaction goals reported prior attitudes toward a topic after being (versus
not being) forewarned that they would receive a message about a topic. The role of general goals
becomes clear in association with the more specific goals people have in the moment (Albarrac´ın &
Handley 2011). Therefore, when people activate a general action goal in the context of processing
a persuasive communication, the general action goal may be fulfilled by the specific goal of thinking
about prior attitudes. Thus, prior attitudes are likely to become more accessible and, in turn, block
the influence of the message.
Albarrac´ın & Handley (2011) tested various aspects of the influence of general action goals
on attitude accessibility and change. Participants previously primed with action (e.g., go), control
(e.g., pear), or inaction (e.g., rest) words completed measures of attitudes toward gun control or
euthanasia after they had or had not been forewarned that they would receive a persuasive mes-
sage about either gun control or euthanasia. Findings indicated that attitudes that were relevant
to the message were reported faster in action than in inaction goal conditions, whereas irrele-
vant attitudes were not affected. Further studies showed less attitude change when forewarned
participants were primed with action than when they were primed with inaction and that action
goals generally decreased elaborative processing of the persuasive message. Unfortunately, some
306 Albarracin ·Shavitt
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39of these experiments had low statistical power, an issue that has been linked to false positives only
in recent years (Simmons et al. 2011). Therefore, further research in this area is important to,
first, identify strong manipulations and, then, implement designs that maximize statistical power.
Research on attitudes has also uncovered broad evaluative responses toward action and inaction.
All else equal, people appear to evaluate action more favorably than inaction. Words like action
are evaluated to be more positive than words of inaction, even when the inaction word is one
with pleasant connotations, such as calm (McCulloch et al. 2012). It may, therefore, be adaptive
for social groups to instill favorable attitudes toward action, leading to action being positive by
default. This pattern, however, is associated with Christian beliefs, suggesting that part of the
action positivity effect derives from the overgeneralization of an ethic in which work is virtuous
and inactivity is sinful.
Even though unspecified action is generally perceived to be positive, a switch in norms may
lead perceivers to refocus and reevaluate action and inaction. When action is described as positive
within a particular investment firm, participants who make financial decisions regret losing after
not investing more than losing after investing (Feldman & Albarrac´ın 2016). In contrast, when
inaction is described as positive within a particular investment firm, participants who make financial
decisions regret losing after investing more than losing after not investing (Feldman & Albarrac´ın
2016). Therefore, despite an overall favoring of action, people are highly sensitive to normative
information and can shift their evaluations according to the context.
The context of language. Another area receiving considerable attention concerns linguistic
processes that affect attitude formation as well as attitude–behavior correspondence. The use
of metaphors and their impact on attitudes is one important focus of investigation. For instance,
reading about the police as either guardians or warriors led to, respectively, more and less liking for
the police (Thibodeau et al. 2017). These effects were due to metaphors operating as an explanatory
device rather than simply activating semantic concepts with different evaluative implications.
Interestingly, the use of metaphors is apparently dependent on the degree of psychological
distance (Liberman & Trope 1998) of the object or situation being explained. Given that metaphors
are used in explanation of abstract rather than concrete concepts, greater psychological distance
from a concept should increase the likelihood of using metaphors for explanation. Furthermore,
people may actively seek metaphors more often to understand psychologically distant concepts
than psychologically close concepts ( Jia & Smith 2013). The metaphor that an influx of immigrants
is analogous to physical contamination of the body leads to negative attitudes toward immigration.
However, this metaphorical impact is stronger when people think about immigration a year in the
future than when they think about immigration a day in the future ( Jia & Smith 2013).
Recent research has also shed new light on the role of self-talk, or inner speech, in attitude
formation, as well as its role as a precursor of behavioral performance. The majority of adults
report engaging in an ongoing internal dialogue, or self-talk, generally covertly. People may re-
peat sentences (e.g., “You/I can do it!” “Stay focused!”) if they believe this speech will motivate
them (Dolcos & Albarracin 2014). The structure of this talk, particularly the effects of the use
of the first or second person in self-talk as well as the role of self-posed questions, is begin-
ning to be the subject of research. When people face challenges or when their past behavior
has yielded undesirable outcomes, the self splits into a speaker and a receiver, leading to ad-
dressing the self in the second person (Zell et al. 2012a). This form of second-person self-talk
is supposedly beneficial for self-regulation because it resembles the form of external control ex-
perienced by children (Dolcos & Albarracin 2014, Zell et al. 2012a). Therefore, such self-talk is
probably a natural way of controlling behavior later in life (Dolcos & Albarracin 2014, Zell et al.
2012b).
www.annualreviews.org • Attitudes and Attitude Change 307
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Self-talk:
self-directed inner
speech, often designed
to control behavior
In research conducted by Dolcos & Albarracin (2014), participants were randomly assigned to
one of two experimental groups (i.e., You or I self-talk conditions) or to a control group. Partici-
pants were then given the opportunity to choose to work on anagrams and received instructions
to prepare for the task by writing self-directed advice. Participants in the control condition com-
pleted the anagrams without this type of preparation. As the researchers predicted, participants
who prepared for the anagram task using sentences beginning with “You” performed better on
the task than participants who wrote sentences beginning with “I” or participants in the control
condition. More importantly for this review, attitudes followed the pattern of behavioral perfor-
mance and were mediators of the effect of the second-person self-talk. These results imply that,
even though second-person self-talk is more commanding that first-person self-talk, the impact of
the second person still resembles that of intrinsic motivation. Research on self-talk has also been
conducted in the area of social anxiety (Kross et al. 2014) and promises to generate important
insights in the years to come.
How people use verbs has been another focus of attention in the area of attitudes, particularly
with respect to the use of past and present and their influence on attitude–behavior correspondence.
For example, if people recount a past experience drinking alcohol, does using the present or the
past tense affect reliance on past behavior as a basis for intentions to drink again in the future?
Carrera and colleagues (2012) sought answers to this very question. In their work, participants
wrote a description about alcohol drinking using either the simple past or the present tense.
They also reported their attitudes toward drinking and their intentions to drink again in the
future, as well as the frequency of past alcohol drinking. Consistent with the possibility that the
past involves greater psychological distance than the present, attitudes predicted intentions better
when drinking was described in the past tense than when it was described in the present tense.
In contrast, past behavior predicted intentions better when drinking was described in the present
tense than when it was described in the past tense.
The context of emotions. Even though emotions are relevant to many attitude domains (see
Clore & Schnall 2005), they appear to be particularly relevant to political attitudes of various
types. For example, during times of war, presidential approval, an attitude toward the president’s
performance, can depend on the specific emotions of anger and anxiety (Lambert et al. 2010). The
term “rally around the flag” describes political situations in which an external threat enhances
support for an otherwise unappreciated right-leaning president. In Argentina, General Galtieri
was president toward the end of a drawn-out military dictatorship responsible for international
isolation, 30,000 missing people, and a large number of political prisoners. When he went to
war against the United Kingdom, however, his approval rating soared, and supportive citizens
filled May Square in Buenos Aires. Likewise, in the United States, George W. Bush enjoyed a
similar trajectory when his approval ratings moved from 39% to 90% following the attacks on
September 11, 2001. According to Lambert and colleagues (2010), the impact of 9/11 on attitudes
toward Bush was mediated by corresponding increases in anger and anxiety. In an experimental
presentation of 9/11 footage years after the event, participants’ retrospective approval of Bush was
higher after the 9/11 video than after a control video, and these attitudes were mediated by the
specific emotions of anger and anxiety, whereas more general negative emotions had no influence
(Lambert et al. 2010).
Emotion regulation strategies can also exert an impact on political attitudes. Intergroup
attitudes in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict were investigated, in the area of emotional regulation,
by Halperin et al. (2013). In their first study, Halperin et al. (2013) asked half of their participants
to apply a cognitive reappraisal technique as they viewed an upcoming presentation. Specifically,
they were taught to respond to the presentation as if they were scientists, thinking analytically
308 Albarracin ·Shavitt
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39General or
dispositional
attitude: attitudes
that characterize the
person as evaluating
most objects positively,
neutrally, or negatively
in a cold, dispassionate way. After this manipulation, all participants watched an anger-inducing
multimedia presentation about Israel’s disengagement from the Gaza Strip and subsequent Pales-
tinian aggression. The cognitive reappraisal technique was effective at reducing anger toward
Palestinians, anger that, in turn, correlated negatively with support for conciliatory policies and
positively with support for aggressive policies. Although the study had a relatively small sample
(d = 0.65, N = 39), similar findings were obtained in a second experiment with measures of
anger and attitudes obtained 5 months after the manipulation of cognitive reappraisal (Halperin
et al. 2013).
The context of other attitudes and evaluative processes. As researchers have opened their
eyes to broad attitude patterns, it has become apparent that people’s attitudes can be similar across
different objects. In particular, shared affective traits can provide information about attitudes re-
gardless of whether the object is President Trump, a new movie, or a toaster. Recent research has
investigated this possibility in a series of studies and an independent replication and extension. In
this work, Hepler & Albarrac´ın (2013) investigated tendencies to generally like or dislike stimuli,
defined as systematic variation in attitude valence as a function of individuals. These dispositional
attitudes were measured by having participants evaluate a large number of stimuli to gauge cen-
tral tendencies. From an initial set of 200 evaluations, findings yielded a final scale of 16 items
about diverse objects such as taxidermy, cold showers, soccer, and politics, rated on scales from 1
(unfavorable) to 7 (favorable). This scale had high internal consistency, as well as high test-retest
reliability, and exhibited good convergent and divergent validity. In particular, dispositional atti-
tudes should be related to other traits associated with positive or negative affect (e.g., extraversion,
optimism) and, indeed, were. However, all of these personality measures accounted for only about
20% of the variance in general attitudes, hinting at the uniqueness of dispositional attitudes.
General or dispositional attitudes are also useful because they can predict unknown attitudes,
including attitudes toward completely novel objects. Two of the studies reported by Hepler &
Albarrac´ın (2013) obtained measures of dispositional attitudes, other traits, and attitudes toward
a never-encountered microwave described in an advertisement. Reported attitudes toward the
new product were consistently predicted by dispositional attitudes above and beyond all other
individual difference measures (e.g., behavioral activation, optimism, trait negative affect, trait
positive affect, agreeableness, need for cognition, need for closure, and more). Therefore, people
who generally liked objects also liked a newly presented object, whereas people who generally
disliked objects disliked it.
An intriguing implication of dispositional attitudes is that they should be expected to also
broadly predict behavior, a possibility examined by Hepler & Albarracin (2014; for a replication, see
Eschleman et al. 2015). Over two experiments, participants reported their dispositional attitudes as
well as their time spent on a number of daily behaviors, such as personal care, education, working,
and traveling. Dispositional attitudes correlated with the number of behaviors reported, but this
was the case for both more and less effortful behaviors. Thus, dispositional attitudes appeared to
predict behavior on the high-effort, active end as well as the low-effort, inactive end. Apparently,
then, dispositional attitudes do not predict only active behavior but rather goal engagement,
including sleeping, more generally.
Individual differences in evaluations have also been described as valence weighting. The valence
weighting bias (Pietri et al. 2013) has been studied with a paradigm in which participants learn about
beans of varying shapes and patterns of speckles that produce either positive or negative outcomes
when selected. After participants learn about the beans, they are presented with new beans that re-
semble previous positive or negative beans. Thus, when a novel bean has characteristics resembling
both a positive and negative bean, a participant who weighs negative information more heavily
www.annualreviews.org • Attitudes and Attitude Change 309
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39should classify that bean as negative, whereas a participant who weighs positive information more
heavily should classify that bean as positive. Rocklage & Fazio (2014) used this same paradigm
to obtain participant measures of valence weighting. Similar to the conclusions of Hepler &
Albarracin’s studies, this individual difference measure predicted approach and avoidance behav-
ior toward objects in a novel environment. Also, participants with a negative-valence-weighting
bias were more likely than those with a positive-valence-weighting bias to change attitudes in
response to negative but false information about an object.
The context of time and space. Above, we discuss the impact of psychological distance on atti-
tudes in the context of language and emotion. Beyond these areas, the effects of construing objects
up close and at a distance have also been the subject of research on what factors influence attitudes.
According to construal level theory (Liberman & Trope 1998), people construe psychologically
proximal objects more concretely. Based on this premise, Ledgerwood et al. (2010) hypothesized
and confirmed that attitudes toward proximal objects were influenced by social information, such
as the preferences of romantic partners. In contrast, attitudes toward more distant objects were
less influenced by social normative considerations and, in one of the experiments, were influenced
by values. Some of these experiments were statistically underpowered (less than 80% power), im-
plying that the probability of both false negatives (power is the confidence with which the null
hypothesis may be rejected) and false positives is potentially high. However, the findings illustrate
an important aspect of the broader picture of attitude bases.
The context of development. The developmental stage and childhood socialization of the in-
dividual is another fundamental context within which attitudes are shaped and reshaped. Recent
research has investigated a variety of developmental and life-stage factors that predispose individ-
uals to particular attitudes and ideologies.
Shifts in specific attitudes across the life span. Developmental shifts are observable in attitudes
toward several specific topic areas. For instance, music preferences are subject to a variety of
developmental shifts across the life span (Bonneville-Roussy et al. 2013), and these shifts shed light
on the contextual factors that shape personal tastes. Adolescent audiences are more passionately
engaged with music, regarding it as more important than do older adults and enjoying it in
more contexts. Moreover, data from an Internet survey sample of a quarter million respondents
showed marked and consistent age trends in musical preferences (Bonneville-Roussy et al. 2013).
Specifically, preferences for mellow, unpretentious, and sophisticated music increased throughout
the life span, whereas preferences for music that is intense and more contemporary was highest
in adolescents and declined in later years. This latter finding not only gives hope to parents of
teenage death metal fans but also supports the notion that the personality traits and psychosocial
goals that characterize each stage of life give rise to distinct musical tastes. For example, intense
music is perceived as “aggressive, tense, and antiestablishment” (Bonneville-Roussy et al. 2013,
p. 12; see also Rentfrow et al. 2011), which may be more resonant with the needs of adolescents
struggling with issues of identity development and autonomy. Consistent with this possibility,
research also points to age-specific preferences for particular types of media content (for a review,
see Valkenburg et al. 2016). Anyone who has ever spent an evening observing ticket buyers at
the multiplex will not be surprised to learn that younger adults show a stronger preference for
arousing, frightening, and even violent media content compared to middle-aged and older adults,
who, in turn, show stronger preferences for calmer, more uplifting, and more meaningful media
content (e.g., Mares & Sun 2010).
310 Albarracin ·Shavitt
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Materialism:
a belief or ideology
emphasizing the
importance of
pursuing financial
success, material
riches, and high status
through consumer
choices
Beyond the realm of individual tastes, developmental shifts in self-focused attitude domains
have been important subjects of investigation. For instance, attitudes toward the self (i.e., self-
esteem) show age-related shifts that follow a quadratic trend across the life span, climbing from
adolescence until middle age (approximately 50–60 years) and then decreasing in old age, largely
due to declines in health and socioeconomic status (Orth et al. 2010, 2012). Moreover, self-
esteem has a significant influence on personal experiences across all major life domains (Orth
et al. 2012). Attitudes toward one’s own aging have also been investigated (Miche et al. 2014) and
are shaped by a variety of life-stage and health factors. Finally, researchers have examined the
relationship between age and job attitudes, finding a positive relationship between age and overall
job satisfaction (for a meta-analysis, see Ng & Feldman 2010).
Developmental antecedents of attitudinal systems. Using data from a two-wave national survey
of early child development, in which parents of 1-month-old infants were interviewed and the
children were surveyed 18 years later, Fraley et al. (2012) examined how early caregiving envi-
ronments help to shape conservative versus liberal political ideologies in late adolescence. Parents
who endorsed more authoritarian attitudes regarding parenting when their children were infants
tended to raise children who were more ideologically conservative. Additional data on the sam-
ple’s temperament in early childhood (age 4.5) suggested that children who showed early signs of
a fearful temperament or had deficits in inhibitory control tended to become conservative by age
18, whereas children who showed high levels of activity and restlessness in early childhood tended
to become liberal as young adults. These findings support a motivated social cognition perspective
that casts conservatism as a motivated response to anxiety and fear and liberalism as a response to
restlessness and undercontrolled ego-related functions.
Another form of ideology, materialism, has also been a focus of developmental research.
Twenge & Kasser (2013) examined societal factors that influence the development of mate-
rialistic values. Their analysis pointed to middle childhood as a particularly important time
in the development of late-adolescent materialism. Those who, during this life stage, experi-
enced high levels of societal instability and disconnection (indexed by societal rates of unem-
ployment and divorce) tended to become more materialistic 10 years later, as young adults.
Similarly, those exposed to high levels of social modeling of consumerist practices (as indexed
by societal advertising spending) in late childhood were also more likely to become material-
istic as young adults. Fortunately, a study of 12–18 year olds suggested that parental and peer
influences during childhood can mitigate the development of materialistic attitudes in adoles-
cents (Chaplin & John 2010). By contributing to the growth of self-esteem in adolescents, par-
ents and peers can decrease the tendency to look to material goods as ways to build positive
self-views.
Developmental shifts in processing. According to socioemotional selectivity theory (Carstensen
2006) motivational shifts across the life span affect the selective processing of information. In
contrast to younger people, who are motivated to pursue goals of acquiring knowledge and broad-
ening horizons, older adults, as they grow to appreciate the fragility of life, increasingly prioritize
present-focused goals of emotional satisfaction and meaning. This change in goals leads to a shift
toward positive information in information processing as people age, a phenomenon referred to
as the age-related positivity effect (e.g., Reed et al. 2014). A recent meta-analysis confirmed that,
when information processing is unconstrained and people are allowed to allocate their attention
spontaneously, older people are significantly more likely to attend to and recall positive than neg-
ative information, whereas the opposite pattern is seen among younger adults (Reed et al. 2014).
This shift can be associated with a variety of effects in persuasion contexts, such as age differences
www.annualreviews.org • Attitudes and Attitude Change 311
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Sleeper effect:
delayed persuasion of a
message when
presentation by a
noncredible
communicator serves
as a discounting cue
in responses to gain- and loss-framed messages (e.g., Mikels et al. 2016, Notthoff & Carstensen
2014).
The Social Context
Social inputs comprise a key contextual influence on attitudes. Therefore, understanding the role
played by the views of others, whether message communicators, friends and network members,
or social media inputs, continues to be a significant focus of attitude research.
The communicator. Persuasive communications entail an implicit or explicit interaction with
the source of the message, a factor that has been of interest to researchers since the field of
persuasion began. Recent findings underscore the importance of this relationship, for instance,
by showing that the persuasiveness of messages can be enhanced by an alignment between a
communicator’s and an audience’s power state (Dubois et al. 2016). Specifically, high-power
communicators tend to generate messages that prioritize competence information, which is more
persuasive to high-power audiences, whereas low-power communicators tend to generate messages
with greater warmth, which is more persuasive to low-power audiences.
Recent research has also enhanced understanding of the processes surrounding source credi-
bility, such as the sleeper effect. Classically, the sleeper effect involves an increase in persuasion
following a delay after a message is presented by a noncredible source. For instance, recipients of
political communications may discount a message from a political opponent because they do not
perceive the source of the message as credible. Over time, however, the recipients may recall the
message but not its noncredible source and, thus, become more persuaded than they were imme-
diately after the message presentation (Kumkale & Albarrac´ın 2004). The conditions for this effect
have been well elucidated meta-analytically (Kumkale & Albarrac´ın 2004), but the definition of
the effect has typically been circumscribed to these situations.
In contrast to this classic scholarship, recent research has uncovered a different type of sleeper
effect involving the communicator instead of the message itself. In the traditional sleeper effect,
the influence of an otherwise effective message remains dormant because it has been discounted
as coming from a noncredible source. However, it is conceivable that a favorable impression of a
communicator may exert a delayed influence if it remains dormant after being discounted because
of weak arguments (Albarracin et al. 2017). In a series of experiments, participants were induced
to form impressions of communicators (e.g., political candidates) who provided noncompelling
arguments. As predicted, under these conditions, the source’s credibility had a delayed effect on
the influence of the message; this effect occurred for various topics and delay lengths.
This novel type of sleeper effect is likely to take place in political campaign contexts, as well as
other contexts in which evaluating the communicator is paramount. This novel finding confirms
that message recipients can process information about the communicator in as much depth as
information about the arguments. As is well known, sources and other cues to persuasion can have
multiple roles—they can be processed as peripheral cues or processed in more detail (Wegener et al.
2010). This assumption of multiple roles in current versions of the elaboration likelihood model
(Wegener et al. 2010) as well as the unimodel (Kruglanski & Gigerenzer 2011) highlights how
most information can be processed either elaborately or nonelaborately. One recent demonstration
of this possibility entailed an analysis of the attitude–behavior relationship. Specifically, attitudes
formed on the basis of extensive information about a source, which supposedly elicits high levels of
processing, were more persistent and predictive of behavior than attitudes formed on the basis of
brief information about the source (Pierro et al. 2012). As persistence and impact on behavior are
frequent consequences of high levels of elaboration (Barden & Tormala 2014, Howe & Krosnick
2017), this work shows once more that communicators can be the target of much attention and
312 Albarracin ·Shavitt
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39thinking (for other research on the effects of concentrating on the communication source, see
Clark & Evans 2014, Clark et al. 2013).
Social media and social networks. With the advent of smart phones and the popularization
of online platforms, the study of media effects has moved into the territory of emerging media.
Some of this work has achieved considerable methodological sophistication, as in longitudinal
studies conducted in naturalistic conditions. For example, the effects of violent video game use on
aggressive behavior (von Salisch et al. 2011) were studied using cross-lagged models in Germany.
This study showed that children’s aggressiveness predicted subsequent violent media use but that
violent media use did not predict aggressiveness. Thus, the effects of violent video game use on
aggressive attitudes are, at best, weak.
Buzz marketing, which leverages word of mouth from popular opinion leaders to change
attitudes within a social network, offers substantial promise for persuasion and has received con-
siderable scholarly attention (e.g., Berger 2014). The potential of buzz marketing is illustrated by a
study of the effects of a health-promotion campaign developed and delivered through a partnership
between the University of Nebraska and the Centers for Disease Control, which involved recruit-
ing teenagers as buzz agents. The campaign ran between 2007 and 2013 and showed promising
effects (Struthers & Wang 2016). Remarkably, 66% of buzz agents improved their attitude toward
physical activity, 63% improved their attitude toward consumption of fruit, and 51% improved
their attitude toward consumption of vegetables, with corresponding changes in behavior in all
areas. In addition to the teenagers who acted as agents of change, other teens who liked the cam-
paign changed attitudes more than those who did not like the campaign. Although this evidence
does not imply that the campaign changed attitudes overall, it did change the attitudes of the
teenagers who liked the campaign.
A similar campaign that included social media was designed to decrease comments express-
ing body dissatisfaction (fat talk) on college campuses (Garnett et al. 2014). The campaign was
implemented in two New England universities. The campaign activities included hosting events
about fat talk, teaching students how to promote positive body conversations, and encouraging
students to sign an online pledge to end fat talk. One of the central messages was “Friends Don’t
Let Friends Fat Talk,” and the organizers of the campaign recommended that this message be
displayed online and in physical locations on the campuses. The campaign had a small effect on
body dissatisfaction, defined as a negative attitude toward one’s own body. In addition, actual
reductions in negative self-talk were observed for students who remembered being exposed to the
campaign, although the study was, overall, underpowered.
Network effects on attitudes have received some attention because of observed similarities in
behavior among people who are socially connected. On the one hand, friends are likely similar
because people develop relationships with similar others through a process of social selection.
On the other hand, friends may become similar through their interactions with others, through
a process of social influence. In the first case, the similarity precedes friendship; in the second,
similarity follows friendship. In a longitudinal study of this issue (de Klepper et al. 2010), the
attitudes toward discipline among students of the Royal Naval Academy of the Netherlands were
followed over time, along with their friendship patterns. Findings indicated that similarity in
attitudes toward discipline was due to influence rather than selection. Naval students had attitudes
similar to those of their friends because they had become friends with others who had then
influenced them.
The influence of members of an individual’s social network is also apparent in work on how
activating social goals can influence attitudes. Women’s romantic goals, for example, can make
them distance themselves from pursuing careers in science, technology, engineering, and math
www.annualreviews.org • Attitudes and Attitude Change 313
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Culture: a shared
meaning system and
common values held
among people who
share a geographic
region, language, or
historical period
Millennial: a member
of the generation born
between 1980 and
1994; their attitudes
and ideologies have
been the subject of
extensive study
Cohort: a group born
into the same
generation
(STEM) fields (Park et al. 2011). Merely viewing images or overhearing conversations related to
romantic relationships yielded less positive attitudes toward STEM fields, but this pattern was
apparent only among women. Looking at the problem using a within-subject paradigm, women
felt more desirable and engaged in more romantic activities on days when they pursued romantic
goals. Unfortunately, however, on those same days, women pursued fewer math-related activities.
This effect of romantic goals also appeared to persist over time, with romantic goals from the
previous day making women less invested in math on the following day. Although these findings
are discouraging for policy makers trying to increase representation of women in STEM fields,
women’s STEM presence may increase through the use of ingroup STEM experts promoting
STEM fields to other women. In particular, these programs lead to more positive implicit and
explicit attitudes toward STEM, as well as commitment to pursue STEM careers, among women
(Stout et al. 2011).
The social functions of attitudes are an intriguing topic, and recent research has shed light on
a broad set of interpersonal motives associated with attitudes. One such function is the feeling of
familiarity experienced by people who share similar negative attitudes (Weaver & Bosson 2011).
Apparently, sharing a negative attitude is sufficient to increase feelings of familiarity (Weaver &
Bosson 2011), probably because expressing negative attitudes to strangers is counternormative
in US culture. Another important social function involves attitudinal ambivalence as a way of
smoothing over interpersonal differences (Pillaud et al. 2013). In particular, people express more
ambivalence when issues are socially controversial, and experimentally increasing topic controversy
leads individuals to manifest more ambivalence (Pillaud et al. 2013). Therefore, attitudes both
influence relations with others and can be strategically altered for self-presentation purposes.
Even in online contexts, communicating one’s attitudes can serve a range of functions (including
impression management, social bonding, and emotion regulation; Berger 2014).
The Historical Context
Achieving a holistic, contextualized understanding of attitudes requires consideration of the gen-
erational, historical, and cultural shifts that give rise to individual evaluations.
Generational context. Generational differences in attitudes generally arise from and are re-
flective of broad sociocultural changes that occur at specific time periods (Donnelly et al. 2016,
Twenge & Kasser 2013, Twenge et al. 2016a). That is, generational differences reflect the im-
pact of the larger cultural context on the individual. How different are the attitudes of people
born into, say, the Millennial generation (born 1980–1994) from those of members of Genera-
tion X (GenXers; born 1965–1979) or Baby Boomers (born 1946–1964)? Although these types of
questions have frequently been addressed through one-time polling comparisons (e.g., Nteta &
Greenlee 2013), such cross-sectional comparisons across generations at a given point in time are
problematic because they confound cohort, age, and historical influences.
Twenge and colleagues (e.g., Donnelly et al. 2016, Twenge & Kasser 2013, Twenge et al.
2016a) have addressed this question by carefully analyzing multiple large-scale surveys of social
attitudes. For instance, in a study of political ideology using age–period–cohort analysis (Yang
& Land 2013) on three large-scale and nationally representative surveys, Twenge et al. (2016b)
separated the effects of the ages of the respondents from those of their cohort and historical time
period. The results uncovered trends toward both greater conservatism and increased political
polarization among the Millennial generation. Millennial twelfth graders and entering college
students appear to be more politically polarized than Baby Boomers and GenXers were at the
same age. Specifically, more twelfth graders in the 2010s identified as either strong Democrats or
314 Albarracin ·Shavitt
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39strong Republicans than did those in earlier decades. At the same time, more Millennials identified
as being politically conservative than did either GenXers or Baby Boomers at the same age, and a
smaller proportion identified as Democrats than did Boomers.
However, ideological attitudes are not the complete story. The trend toward greater self-
identification as conservatives among Millennials exists alongside their increasingly liberal and
tolerant attitudes regarding religious nonbelievers, nontraditional gender roles, and same-sex
marriage (for a review, see, e.g., Donnelly et al. 2016) and their decreased beliefs in God or religion
(Twenge et al. 2016a). This result illustrates that attitudes toward specific issues and topics do not
necessarily define or track overall party identification in a consistent way. The characteristics that
define ideological attitudes are themselves dynamic and shaped by their sociocultural context—as a
result, what was defined as conservative in 1970 does not necessarily correspond to what that word
currently means. For instance, Millennials and GenXers have mostly continued the social trends
begun by prior cohorts toward more egalitarian attitudes about gender roles, with greater support
for working mothers and nonworking fathers compared to previous generations (Donnelly et al.
2016). Taken together, these results suggest that some nuance is required when summarizing
generational differences in political attitudes.
Much stronger claims have been made about generational shifts in attitudes toward the self,
community, work, and materialistic lifestyles. Characterizing the Millennial cohort as “Generation
Me,” Twenge (2014) reviewed evidence that Millennials are more self-focused and individualis-
tic, endorsing more favorable attitudes and values regarding money, fame, and social image while
showing less community feeling than previous cohorts. Millennials are less likely than previous co-
horts to report empathic concern or to take others’ perspectives, being less likely to agree that “I of-
ten have tender, concerned feelings for people less fortunate than me” or “I sometimes try to under-
stand my friends better by imagining how things look from their perspective” (Konrath et al. 2011).
Moreover, GenXer and Millennial respondents appear to have more materialistic attitudes
compared to the Boomer generation (Twenge & Kasser 2013). They also appear to have less
favorable attitudes regarding the importance of work and less willingness to work hard compared
to Boomers (Twenge & Kasser 2013). Specifically, in a national survey of twelfth graders, among
GenXer and Millennial respondents, desires for expensive material purchases (e.g., a new car
every 2–3 years, a vacation house, a recreational vehicle) have steadily increased relative to those
of youth in the 1970’s. At the same time, the attitudes of twelfth graders toward the centrality of
work appear to have declined, as measured by agreement with such items as, “I want to do my best
in my job, even if this sometimes means working overtime.” These patterns suggest that, among
younger generations, material desires may have exceeded willingness to work to fulfill them. Note,
however, that the evidence for shifts in materialism may depend upon how materialism is assessed
(see Trzesniewski & Donnellan 2010) and that several studies show no generational differences
in work ethic endorsement (see Zabel et al. 2016).
Climatic and historical events as context. Major climatic and social occurrences of the past
decade have enabled psychologists to study the effects of naturalistic events on attitudes. Studying
the effects of hurricanes on political and social attitudes is a creative instance of this approach (e.g.,
Levy et al. 2010, Rudman et al. 2013). For instance, in Rudman et al.’s (2013) work, New Jersey
residents were surveyed before and after Hurricanes Irene and Sandy to determine support for
politicians who try to combat or deny climate change. Implicit attitudes toward a Green politician
were negative before both hurricanes but became positive afterwards. These patterns were most
pronounced for participants who had been personally affected by the hurricanes.
The impact of the 2007–2008 global financial crisis on political attitudes was investigated in
a large panel study in New Zealand (Milojev et al. 2015). As was the case in most of the rest
www.annualreviews.org • Attitudes and Attitude Change 315
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39of the world, the crisis greatly impacted New Zealand’s economy, producing a 3.4% decrease
in the gross domestic product and a 3-to-7% increase in unemployment. According to system
justification theory ( Jost & Banaji 1994), people at an economic or social disadvantage need to
perceive the system as being just, a dynamic that helps to explain conservatism in underprivileged
groups. Consistent with this possibility, New Zealanders of lower socioeconomic status showed
an increase in political conservatism following the financial crisis. Attitudes, then, can depend not
only on climatic but also on economic factors outside of the individual’s control.
The impact of political events on attitudes was illustrated above when we discussed the emo-
tional concomitants of the rally around the flag effect (Lambert et al. 2010). Other unique his-
torical events have presented ideal opportunities to study the potent changes induced by such
events. One such case involved the longstanding political and legal system of segregation in place
in South Africa between 1948 and 1994. Intergroup attitudes were surveyed at various points
over a 37-year period (1973–2009), allowing Mynhardt (2013) to investigate historical changes
associated with these events. The ambitious study involved measures of attitudes toward English-
speaking Whites, Afrikaans-speaking Whites, Indians, “coloureds,” and Blacks. Notably, over the
period of study, English-speaking Whites’ attitudes toward their own group became less positive
(d = 0.29), whereas the English-speaking Whites’ attitudes toward Indians, Afrikaans-speaking
Whites, and coloureds became more favorable. Despite these promising changes, the attitudes
of English-speaking Whites toward Blacks became more negative (d = 0.70) during the entire
period, including post-Apartheid. Furthermore, during the period of consolidation and social
transformation (2000–2008), the favorability of their attitudes toward Blacks continued to plum-
met. The attitudes of Blacks were also interesting, showing an initial liking for English-speaking
Whites and a negative turn in attitudes toward Afrikaans-speaking Whites following racial discord
in the 1970s.
The impact of the presidential candidacy and election of Barack Obama, analyzed above,
appears to have affected White Americans’ attitudes towards Black Americans. In analyses of
election surveys from 1992 to 2008, in which US representative samples of White respondents
rated Blacks on scales from “stupid” to “intelligent” and from “lazy” to “hardworking,” Whites’
beliefs in Blacks’ intelligence and work ethic became stronger and less prejudicial, although Whites
continued to be perceived more positively than Blacks (Welch & Sigelman 2011). These attitudinal
shifts have been described as the Obama effect and show how ethnic diversity among those who
hold powerful positions can revolutionize social attitudes.
Culture as context. The sociocultural context influences attitudinal processes in a number of
ways, as a rapidly growing body of research demonstrates. For instance, cultural factors can in-
fluence information processing strategies (Briley et al. 2014), shaping thinking styles (Lalwani &
Shavitt 2013, Nisbett et al. 2001), general goals (Torelli & Shavitt 2010, Yang et al. 2015), and
the role of feelings and metacognitive experiences in decision making (Hong & Chang 2015).
Western and non-Western cultural contexts. Most work in this area focuses on the distinctions
between independent and interdependent self-construals, individualistic and collectivistic cul-
tural backgrounds and orientations, or Western and non-Western cultural contexts. For instance,
Hong & Chang (2015) showed that an independent versus interdependent self-construal (either
measured or primed) strengthens the influence of incidental affect on evaluations, whereas an
interdependent self-construal strengthens the reliance on reasons. Moreover, independents (in-
terdependents) value a selected option more highly when they use a feeling-based (reason-based)
strategy in choosing, presumably because the independent self seeks to enhance its own personal
satisfaction whereas the interdependent self is concerned with justifying its preferences to others.
316 Albarracin ·Shavitt
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Person-centric
model: traditional
Western view of
attitudes, defined by a
focus on the individual
and the development
and expression of
personal preferences
As a result of the broad influences of culture on attitude formation and change, cultural factors
are often described as moderators of attitudinal processes (see Albarracin et al. 2005). Attitude
scholars acknowledge cultural effects on established processes, but their influence is cast as a
boundary condition. Until recently, cross-cultural theorizing has not generally been applied in an
effort to expand attitudinal theorizing. However, many of the definitional and theoretical assump-
tions in the attitudes literature reflect primarily Western philosophical commitments. Further-
more, much of the extant knowledge about persuasion phenomena has emerged from a traditional
approach to attitudes and social cognition, in which the defining feature is the focus on the in-
dividual. In this Western, person-centric model, the focus is on the development and expression
of personal preferences and making one’s decisions based on these preferences. This approach, as
developed in the West, may offer an incomplete account of the nature and function of evaluative
processes in non-Western contexts. It is worth considering the extent to which these premises
apply to attitudes in non-Western cultural contexts. How do attitudes function in contexts where
maintaining relationships, fulfilling expected social roles, and being normatively appropriate are
often more important than forming and expressing distinct personal preferences?
Several studies have suggested that attitudes function differently in non-Western cultures. For
example, Indian employees are more likely than Americans to make choices based upon what is
expected by authority figures, irrespective of their own personal preferences (Savani et al. 2012).
An analysis of survey data tapping concern for the environment from 48 countries (Eom et al.
2016) showed that, for nations that are less individualistic, personal attitudes are less predictive of
environmental behavior intentions. A follow-up experiment showed that, although environmental
attitudes are a strong predictor of pro-environmental product choices in the United States, they
are not in Japan, where, instead social norms predict choices (Eom et al. 2016).
Most attitude theories assume, for instance, that personal preferences and choices rooted in
those preferences are foundational and are, therefore, the key to achieving persuasion outcomes.
However, in non-Western contexts, where a normative-contextual model applies (Riemer et al.
2014), normative pressures, structured through cultural practices, shape attitudes. Parents direct
their children’s attention to normative aspects of events (“What were the children doing?”) rather
than to their own personal emotional responses (“Did you like it?”) (Wang 2013), and other
societal structures reinforce the emphasis on norms and relationships (Markus & Conner 2013).
In other words, in many cultures, the emphasis is on awareness of social expectations, norms,
and obligations and integration of these factors into one’s preferences (e.g., Gelfand et al. 2011,
Li et al. 2017, Miller et al. 2011). Chiu et al. (2010) point out that, in such contexts, intersub-
jective perceptions (people’s perceptions of the normative consensus) can better explain choices
than can personal beliefs and values. Rather than holding unique personal preferences that set
the self apart, individuals hold attitudes that help them to conform and to validate shared social
norms (Boer & Fischer 2013), serving to affirm and deepen relationships with others. Moreover,
Easterners, as compared to Westerners, tend to have a more difficult time choosing at all, and
this indecisiveness is tied to dialectical thinking (Ng & Hynie 2014), a belief system that tolerates
contradictory information (Spencer-Rodgers et al. 2010) and emphasizes interconnections and
holistic relationships. In contrast, Westerners prefer action, and their intolerance of contradiction
leads to oppositional attitudes toward the concepts of action and inaction, which appear contra-
dictory, whereas people from dialectical East Asian societies express more balanced and moderate
views about action and inaction (Zell et al. 2012a) and other targets (see Johnson et al. 2011).
Indeed, in Western contexts, having stable and internally consistent attitudes is fundamentally
important to guiding action, and ambivalent attitudes are, therefore, undesirable (Riemer et al.
2014). As a result, among Westerners, having ambivalent attitudes is aversive, and such attitudes
www.annualreviews.org • Attitudes and Attitude Change 317
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Individualism:
cultural value system
emphasizing the
importance of
self-reliance and
independence and the
pursuit of personal
goals over the
ingroup’s goals
Collectivism:
cultural value system
emphasizing pursuit of
group goals, harmony,
interdependence with
others, and
maintenance of strong
relationships
are more likely than univalent attitudes to change, whereas this is not the case among Easterners
(Ng et al. 2012).
East Asian philosophy emphasizes the idea that everything needs to be evaluated in its context
(Nisbett et al. 2001). This principle leads to an enhanced tendency to see interconnections between
elements of a larger whole, for instance, between a parent brand (e.g., McDonald’s) and a new brand
extension launched by the brand that is not an obvious fit (e.g., McDonald’s salads). Holistic (versus
analytic) thinkers can be more favorable toward distant brand extensions for functional products
because they are more likely to find symbolic relationships among such products (Monga & John
2010). Similarly, whereas consumers in general tend to judge a product’s quality based on its price,
having a holistic thinking style strengthens this perceived price–quality relationship (Lalwani &
Shavitt 2013). Specifically, consumers who adopt a holistic rather than an analytic thinking style
are more likely to use a product’s price to evaluate its quality because of their tendency to see
interrelations between price and other product elements (Lalwani & Shavitt 2013).
Research points to differences in the functions of attitudes, as well. In Western contexts,
personal attitudes often serve a self-expressive function, as preferences are strategically formed
and expressed to convey desired individual identities (e.g., Berger 2014). In contrast, in non-
Western contexts, harmony and social cohesion are more persuasive (e.g., Han & Shavitt 1994),
and attitudes function to enhance relational embeddedness (Riemer et al. 2014) and to express
values of conformity and tradition that support social norms (Boer & Fischer 2013). In such
contexts, self-expression, as an assertion of individuality, is less motivating, and self-expressive
acts are less prevalent (e.g., Chu & Kim 2011, Kim & Sherman 2007). In line with this pattern, an
analysis of online customer reviews posted in China (on https://www.amazon.cn) and the United
States (on https://www.amazon.com) revealed that Chinese reviews were less self-expressive than
American reviews in that they were less likely to provide their personal opinions about products
and contained fewer recommendations to others (Lai et al. 2013).
Taken together, then, a growing body of research suggests cultural differences in the struc-
ture, functions, and characteristics of attitudes. Traditional attitude theorizing has tended to
view attitudes as intrapersonal entities tuned to the pursuit of individual goals—a person-centric
model. There are significant opportunities to broaden attitude theorizing to address the distinct
normative-contextual aspects of attitudes in non-Western cultures (Riemer et al. 2014).
Horizontal and vertical cultural contexts. In addition to the broad distinction between indi-
vidualistic, independent cultures and collectivistic, interdependent ones, recent research has also
addressed the influence of other important dimensions of culture on attitudes and persuasion
processes (for a review, see Shavitt et al. 2017). For instance, cultures vary in their propensity to
emphasize hierarchy, a distinction within the individualism–collectivism continuum that is cap-
tured by cultures or orientations that are horizontal (valuing equality) versus vertical (emphasizing
hierarchy; Triandis & Gelfand 1998). In vertical-individualist societies, such as the United States
and Great Britain, an individualistic form of hierarchy, where gaining personal status is linked to
the individual self and people seek opportunities to stand out and to impress others, is emphasized.
In contrast, in horizontal-individualist societies, such as Denmark, Norway, and Australia, the fo-
cus is on expressing uniqueness, self-reliance, and self-expression rather than improving personal
status. In vertical-collectivist societies, such as South Korea, China, and India, the emphasis is
on fulfilling duties, prioritizing ingroup goals over personal goals, and complying with authority
figures. Finally, in horizontal-collectivist societies, such as Brazil and some other Latin American
contexts, the emphasis is on interdependence, benevolence, and sociability, not hierarchy (Torelli
& Shavitt 2010; for a review, see Shavitt & Cho 2016). Differences in orientation along the
318 Albarracin ·Shavitt
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39horizontal–vertical continuum have also been shown within countries among ethnic and cultural
groups. For instance, Hispanic Americans tend to score higher than European Americans in hori-
zontal collectivism and lower in vertical individualism (Torelli & Shavitt 2010, Torelli et al. 2015).
This horizontal versus vertical cultural distinction is reflected in the content of persuasive
appeals and in attitudinal patterns. For instance, an analysis of the content of over 1,200 magazine
advertisements in five countries (Denmark, South Korea, Poland, Russia, and the United States)
revealed that advertisements in vertical cultures (e.g., the United States and South Korea) put more
emphasis on status, luxury, and prestige than do ads in horizontal cultures (e.g., Denmark) (Shavitt
et al. 2011). For example, in vertical cultures, advertisements are more likely to use prestigious
endorsers identified as Ivy League graduates or to label brands as “award-winning.” On the other
hand, uniqueness appeals are more prevalent in horizontal individualist cultures (e.g., Denmark)
than in countries that fall into vertical cultural categories. For instance, such advertisements may
highlight how the advertised brand expresses consumers’ personal style.
Similarly, consumers tend to prefer brands and advertisements that resonate with these hori-
zontal and vertical cultural orientations (Torelli & Shavitt 2010, Torelli et al. 2012). For example,
having a horizontal collectivistic orientation predicts liking a brand that conveys self-transcendence
values in its advertising (e.g., “Supporting humanitarian programs in developing countries because
we care about building a better world.”) and predicts an affinity for brands that embody concerns
for the welfare of others. Having a vertical collectivistic orientation predicts liking a brand that
conveys conservation values (e.g., “The status quo in luxury watches. A tradition of classic designs
and impeccable workmanship for 115 years.”). Having a vertical individualistic orientation predicts
liking brands that symbolize status and prestige and advertisements that convey self-enhancement
(e.g., “An exceptional piece of adornment that conveys your status and signifies your exquisite
taste.”), whereas having a horizontal individualistic orientation predicts liking a brand that con-
veys openness (e.g., “A travel companion to help you live an exciting life full of adventures waiting
around every corner.”) (Torelli & Shavitt 2010, Torelli et al. 2012). Moreover, these relations
emerge across cultural groups. For example, Brazilians, who score relatively high in horizontal
collectivistic orientation (compared to European Americans, Canadians, and East Asians), tend to
prefer brands that symbolize prosocial values more than do individuals in other cultural groups.
Norwegians, who score relatively low in vertical individualistic orientation, tend to prefer brands
that symbolize status and prestige values less than do individuals in the other groups. A multi-
level analysis further indicated that vertical individualistic and horizontal collectivistic cultural
orientations partially mediate cultural group–level differences in liking for these respective types
of brands (Torelli & Shavitt 2010, study 3). Evidence also suggests that distinct mindsets can be
triggered when concepts relevant to each cultural orientation are cued, influencing the processing
of information about an object (Torelli & Shavitt 2010).
CONCLUSION
Our review highlights the sizeable and long-standing research interest in attitudes and attitude
change. Research between 2010 and 2017 has elucidated many details regarding the cognitive and
motivational processes of attitude formation, attitude change, and attitude–behavior correspon-
dence. That said, this period of attitude research has been characterized by significant shifts. Our
focus on contextual factors in this review encapsulates a key qualitative change in recent years in the
scientific research agenda on attitudes—a shift from a focus on microprocesses to a more holistic,
contemporary understanding of attitudes as they exist in three fundamental contexts: the person
as a whole, the social context, and the broad sociohistorical context. This contextual focus on the
www.annualreviews.org • Attitudes and Attitude Change 319
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39person as a whole links attitude change to individual values, general goals, language, emotions,
and developmental and life span influences. The focus on the social context links attitude change
to the individual’s interactions with communicators, social networks, and social media. The focus
on the broad sociohistorical context recognizes the impact of historically significant climatic, po-
litical, and economic events, as well as the fundamental impact of culture on the characteristics
and functions of attitudes.
For decades, particularly during the 1980s and 1990s, research on attitude change was pri-
marily focused on information processing—a label applying a computer processing metaphor,
assumed to operate across situations and topics. The period of research covered in the previous
Annual Review of Psychology article on attitudes and attitude change was characterized as one of
integrative theorizing (Bohner & Dickel 2011), as efforts to integrate cognitive process models
and explicit and implicit attitudes were a primary concern. In the current period (2010–2017),
a new contextualism has added nuance to our understanding of attitudes, bringing with it more
attention to the substantive content of attitudes. Rather than seeking integration, this approach
offers an enhanced understanding of distinctions between attitudinal domains. After years of leav-
ing attitude objects out of the conversation, attitude change research now increasingly concerns
itself with shifts in specific attitude clusters (e.g., attitudes toward political issues, music, jobs
and work, community, climate change, materialistic goals, status brands, authority figures, and
even the concepts of action or inaction) and what these shifts reveal about the contexts in which
these attitudes were formed. As future research continues to mine the influence of the personal,
social, and sociohistorical contexts, we look forward to a more situated understanding of attitude
formation and change.
SUMMARY POINTS
1. The degree of attitude change generally observed in published research tends to be
modest, at about one third of a standard deviation.
2. Linking a specific advocacy to broad values can shape attitudes toward a policy in line
with the values. Values influence behavior by mediating influences on attitudes more
specifically connected to the behavior.
3. Attitudes are easier to remember and more difficult to change when action goals are
activated.
4. Second-person self-talk can induce positive attitudes toward a task.
5. Emotional regulation can reduce negative attitudes.
6. Developmental shifts are observable in attitudes toward many topic areas, from music
and media to the self. The roots of political and materialistic ideologies can be traced to
early childhood experiences.
7. The attitudes of the Millennial generation differ from those of prior generations in being
more conservative fiscally and politically, liberal socially (e.g., support for egalitarian
gender roles and same-sex marriage), individualistic, self-focused, and materialistic.
8. Attitude theorizing, as developed in the West, offers an incomplete account of how
attitudes function and are structured in non-Western cultures, where normative processes
play a stronger role in shaping attitudes and their functions.
320 Albarracin ·Shavitt
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39FUTURE ISSUES
1. It is important to maintain a common terminology to facilitate tracking attitude research.
Currently, some of the work on attitudes uses terms such as “evaluative judgments” or
“values” instead of “attitudes.”
2. We are only beginning to understand patterns of delayed attitude change, and these
patterns deserve future attention.
3. Attitudes must be studied within social networks and in relation to historic and other
environmental events.
4. Attitude change strategies must be systematically tested across cultures.
5. Analyses of generational or developmental influences on attitudes must disentangle the
influences of age, historical time period, and cohort.
6. To expand attitude theorizing across cultural regions, the distinct characteristics and
functions of attitudes in non-Western cultures deserve attention.
7. Although most attitude research is properly statistically powered, some areas are not and
require increased methodological rigor.
8. Psychological research on attitudes would benefit from greater attention to public policy
considerations and applied issues.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
LITERATURE CITED
Ajzen I, Madden TJ. 1986. Prediction of goal-directed behavior: attitudes, intentions, and perceived behavioral
control. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 22(5):453–74
Albarrac´ın D, Handley IM. 2011. The time for doing is not the time for change: effects of general action and
inaction goals on attitude retrieval and attitude change. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 100(6):983–98
Albarrac´ın D, Handley IM, Noguchi K, McCulloch KC, Li H, et al. 2008. Increasing and decreasing motor
and cognitive output: a model of general action and inaction goals. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 95(3):510–23
Albarracin D, Kumkale GT, Del Vento PP. 2017. How people can become persuaded by weak messages
presented by credible communicators: Not all sleeper effects are created equal. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 68:171–
80
Albarracin D, Zanna MP, Johnson BT, Kumkale GT. 2005. Attitudes: introduction and scope. In The Handbook
of Attitudes, ed. D Albarracin, BT Johnson, MP Zanna, pp. 3–19. Hove, UK: Psychol. Press
Allport GW. 1935. Attitudes. In A Handbook of Social Psychology, ed. C Murchison, pp. 798–844. Worcester,
MA: Clark Univ. Press
Barden J, Tormala ZL. 2014. Elaboration and attitude strength: the new meta-cognitive perspective. Soc.
Personal. Psychol. Compass 8(1):17–29
Berger J. 2014. Word of mouth and interpersonal communication: a review and directions for future research.
J. Consum. Psychol. 24(4):586–607
Blankenship KL, Wegener DT, Murray RA. 2012. Circumventing resistance: using values to indirectly change
attitudes. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 103(4):606–21
www.annualreviews.org • Attitudes and Attitude Change 321
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Blankenship KL, Wegener DT, Murray RA. 2015. Values, inter-attitudinal structure, and attitude change:
Value accessibility can increase a related attitude’s resistance to change. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull.
41(12):1739–50
Boer D, Fischer R. 2013. How and when do personal values guide our attitudes and sociality? Explaining
cross-cultural variability in attitude-value linkages. Psychol. Bull. 139(5):1113–47
Bohner G, Dickel N. 2011. Attitudes and attitude change. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 62:391–417
Bonneville-Roussy A, Rentfrow PJ, Xu MK, Potter J. 2013. Music through the ages: trends in musical engage-
ment and preferences from adolescence through middle adulthood. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 105(4):703–17
Briley D, Wyer RS, Li E. 2014. A dynamic view of cultural influence: a review. J. Consum. Psychol. 24(4):557–71
Calanchini J, Sherman JW. 2013. Implicit attitudes reflect associative, non-associative, and non-attitudinal
processes. Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass 7(9):654–67
Cameron CD, Brown-Iannuzzi JL, Payne BK. 2012. Sequential priming measures of implicit social cognition:
a meta-analysis of associations with behavior and explicit attitudes. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 16(4):330–50
Carrera P, Mu ˜noz D, Caballero A, Fern´andez I, Albarrac´ın D. 2012. The present projects past behavior
into the future while the past projects attitudes into the future: how verb tense moderates predictors of
drinking intentions. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 48(5):1196–200
Carstensen LL. 2006. The influence of a sense of time on human development. Science 312:1913–16
Chan MS, Jones CR, Albarracin D. 2017. Countering false beliefs: an analysis of the evidence and recom-
mendations of best practices for the retraction and correction of scientific misinformation. In The Oxford
Handbook of the Science of Science Communication, ed. KH Jamieson, D Kahan, DA Scheufele, pp. 331–39.
Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ. Press
Chaplin LN, John DR. 2010. Interpersonal influences on adolescent materialism: a new look at the role of
parents and peers. J. Consum. Psychol. 20(2):176–84
Chiu C-Y, Gelfand MJ, Yamagishi T, Shteynberg G, Wan C. 2010. Intersubjective culture: the role of
intersubjective perceptions in cross-cultural research. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 5(4):482–93
Chu SC, Kim Y. 2011. Determinants of consumer engagement in electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) in
social networking sites. Int. J. Advert. 30(1):47–75
Clark JK, Evans AT. 2014. Source credibility and persuasion: the role of message position in self-validation.
Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 40(8):1024–36
Clark JK, Wegener DT, Sawicki V, Petty RE, Bri ˜nol P. 2013. Evaluating the message or the messenger?
Implications for self-validation in persuasion. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 39(12):1571–84
Clore GL, Schnall S. 2005. The influence of affect on attitude. In The Handbook of Attitudes, ed. D Albarracin,
BT Johnson, MP Zanna, pp. 437–90. Hove, UK: Psychol. Press
de Klepper M, Sleebos E, van de Bunt G, Agneessens F. 2010. Similarity in friendship networks: selection or
influence? The effect of constraining contexts and non-visible individual attributes. Soc. Netw. 32(1):82–90
Dolcos S, Albarracin D. 2014. The inner speech of behavioral regulation: intentions and task performance
strengthen when you talk to yourself as a You. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 44(6):636–42
Donnelly K, Twenge JM, Clark MA, Shaikh SK, Beiler-May A, Carter NT. 2016. Attitudes toward women’s
work and family roles in the United States, 1976–2013. Psychol. Women Q. 40(1):361684315590774
Dubois D, Rucker DD, Galinsky AD. 2016. Dynamics of communicator and audience power: the persuasive-
ness of competence versus warmth. J. Consum. Res. 43(1):68–85
Ecker UKH, Lewandowsky S, Fenton O, Martin K. 2014. Do people keep believing because they want to?
Preexisting attitudes and the continued influence of misinformation. Mem. Cogn. 42(2):292–304
Effron DA, Miller DT. 2012. How the moralization of issues grants social legitimacy to act on one’s attitudes.
Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 38(5):690–701
Ehret PJ, Monroe BM, Read SJ. 2015. Modeling the dynamics of evaluation: a multilevel neural network
implementation of the iterative reprocessing model. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 19(2):148–76
Eom K, Kim HS, Sherman DK, Ishii K. 2016. Cultural variability in the link between environmental concern
and support for environmental action. Psychol. Sci. 27(10):1–9
Eschleman KJ, Bowling NA, Judge TA. 2015. The dispositional basis of attitudes: a replication and extension
of Hepler and Albarrac´ın 2013. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 108(5):e1–15
Feinberg M, Willer R. 2013. The moral roots of environmental attitudes. Psychol. Sci. 24(1):56–62
322 Albarracin ·Shavitt
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Feldman G, Albarrac´ın D. 2016. Norm theory and the action-effect: the role of social norms in regret following
action and inaction. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 69:111–20
Fraley RC, Griffin BN, Belsky J, Roisman GI. 2012. Developmental antecedents of political ideology: a
longitudinal investigation from birth to age 18 years. Psychol. Sci. 23(11):1425–31
Galdi S, Gawronski B, Arcuri L, Friese M. 2012. Selective exposure in decided and undecided individuals.
Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 38(5):559–69
Garnett BR, Buelow R, Franko DL, Becker C, Rodgers RF, Austin SB. 2014. The importance of campaign
saliency as a predictor of attitude and behavior change: a pilot evaluation of social marketing campaign
Fat Talk Free Week. Health Commun. 29(10):984–95
Gelfand MJ, Raver JL, Nishii L, Leslie LM, Lun J, et al. 2011. Differences between tight and loose cultures:
a 33-nation study. Science 332(6033):1100–4
Greenwald AG, Banaji MR, Nosek BA. 2015. Statistically small effects of the implicit association test can have
societally large effects. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 108(4):553–61
Greenwald AG, Poehlman TA, Uhlmann EL, Banaji MR. 2009. Understanding and using the implicit asso-
ciation test: III. Meta-analysis of predictive validity. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 97(1):17–41
Halperin E, Porat R, Tamir M, Gross JJ. 2013. Can emotion regulation change political attitudes in intractable
conflicts? From the laboratory to the field. Psychol. Sci. 24(1):106–11
Han S-P, Shavitt S. 1994. Persuasion and culture: advertising appeals in individualistic and collectivistic
societies. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 30(4):326–50
Hart W, Albarrac´ın D, Eagly AH, Brechan I, Lindberg MJ, Merrill L. 2009. Feeling validated versus being
correct: a meta-analysis of selective exposure to information. Psychol. Bull. 135(4):555–88
Hepler J, Albarrac´ın D. 2013. Attitudes without objects: evidence for a dispositional attitude, its measurement,
and its consequences. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 104(6):1060–76
Hepler J, Albarracin D. 2014. Liking more means doing more: Dispositional attitudes predict patterns of
general action. Soc. Psychol. 45(5):391–98
Hong J, Chang HH. 2015. “I” follow my heart and “we” rely on reasons: the impact of self-construal on
reliance on feelings versus reasons in decision making. J. Consum. Res. 41(April):1392–411
Howe LC, Krosnick JA. 2017. Attitude strength. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 68:327–51
Hunt CV, Kim A, Borgida E, Chaiken S. 2010. Revisiting the self-interest versus values debate: the role of
temporal perspective. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 46(6):1155–58
Jamieson KH, Hardy BW. 2014. Leveraging scientific credibility about Arctic sea ice trends in a polarized
political environment. PNAS 111(Suppl.):13598–605
Jia L, Smith ER. 2013. Distance makes the metaphor grow stronger: a psychological distance model of
metaphor use. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 49(3):492–97
Johnson TP, Shavitt S, Holbrook AL. 2011. Survey response styles across cultures. In Cross-Cultural Research
Methods in Psychology, ed. D Matsumoto, F van de Vijver, pp. 130–75. Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ. Press
Jost JT, Banaji MR. 1994. The role of stereotyping in system-justification and the production of false con-
sciousness. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 33(1):1–27
Jung CG. 1923. Psychological Types, or the Psychology of Individuation. Z ¨urich: Rascher Verl.
Kalinoski ZT, Steele-Johnson D, Peyton EJ, Leas KA, Steinke J, Bowling NA. 2013. A meta-analytic evaluation
of diversity training outcomes. J. Organ. Behav. 34(8):1076–104
Kim HS, Sherman DK. 2007. “Express yourself ”: culture and the effect of self-expression on choice.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 92(1):1–11
Konrath SH, O’Brien EH, Hsing C. 2011. Changes in dispositional empathy in American college students
over time: a meta-analysis. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 15(2):180–98
Kross E, Bruehlman-Senecal E, Park J, Burson A, Dougherty A, et al. 2014. Self-talk as a regulatory mechanism:
How you do it matters. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 106(2):304–24
Kruglanski AW, Gigerenzer G. 2011. Intuitive and deliberate judgments are based on common principles.
Psychol. Rev. 118(1):97–109
Kumkale GT, Albarrac´ın D. 2004. The sleeper effect in persuasion: a meta-analytic review. Psychol. Bull.
130(1):143–72
Lai J, He P, Chou H-M, Zhou L. 2013. Impact of national culture on online consumer review behavior. Glob.
J. Bus. Res. 7(1):109–15
www.annualreviews.org • Attitudes and Attitude Change 323
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Lalwani AK, Shavitt S. 2013. You get what you pay for? Self-construal influences price-quality judgments.
J. Consum. Res. 40(2):255–67
Lambert AJ, Scherer LD, Schott JP, Olson KR, Andrews RK, et al. 2010. Rally effects, threat, and attitude
change: an integrative approach to understanding the role of emotion. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 98(6):886–
903
Ledgerwood A, Trope Y, Chaiken S. 2010. Flexibility now, consistency later: Psychological distance and
construal shape evaluative responding. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 99(1):32–51
Lemmer G, Wagner U. 2015. Can we really reduce ethnic prejudice outside the lab? A meta-analysis of direct
and indirect contact interventions. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 45(2):152–68
Levy SR, Freitas AL, Mendoza-Denton R, Kugelmass H, Rosenthal L. 2010. When sociopolitical events strike
cultural beliefs: divergent impact of Hurricane Katrina on African Americans’ and European Americans’
endorsement of the Protestant work ethic. Basic Appl. Soc. Psychol. 32(3):207–16
Li R, Gordon S, Gelfand MJ. 2017. Tightness-looseness: a new framework to understand consumer behavior.
J. Consum. Psychol. 27(3):377–91
Liberman N, Trope Y. 1998. The role of feasibility and desirability considerations in near and distant future
decisions: a test of temporal construal theory. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 75(1):5–18
Mares ML, Sun Y. 2010. The multiple meanings of age for television content preferences. Hum. Commun.
Res. 36(3):372–96
Markus HR, Conner A. 2013. Clash!: How to Thrive in a Multicultural World. New York: Plume
McCulloch KC, Li H, Hong S, Albarracin D. 2012. Na¨ıve definitions of action and inaction: the continuum,
spread, and valence of behaviors. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 42(2):227–34
Meissner F, Rothermund K. 2013. Estimating the contributions of associations and recoding in the implicit
association test: the ReAL model for the IAT. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 104(1):45–69
Mercier H. 2016. The argumentative theory: predictions and empirical evidence. Trends Cogn. Sci. 20(9):689–
700
Mercier H, Sperber D. 2011. Why do humans reason? Arguments for an argumentative theory. Behav. Brain
Sci. 34(2):57–111
Miche M, Els¨asser VC, Schilling OK, Wahl H-W. 2014. Attitude toward own aging in midlife and early
old age over a 12-year period: examination of measurement equivalence and developmental trajectories.
Psychol. Aging 29(3):588–600
Mikels JA, Shuster MM, Thai ST, Smith-Ray R, Waugh CE, et al. 2016. Messages that matter: age differences
in affective responses to framed health messages. Psychol. Aging 31(4):409–14
Miles E, Crisp RJ. 2014. A meta-analytic test of the imagined contact hypothesis. Group Process. Intergroup
Relat. 17(1):3–26
Milfont TL, Duckitt J, Wagner C. 2010. A cross-cultural test of the value-attitude-behavior hierarchy. J. Appl.
Soc. Psychol. 40(11):2791–813
Miller DT, Effron DA. 2010. Psychological license: when it is needed and how it functions. Adv. Exp. Soc.
Psychol. 43(C):115–55
Miller JG, Das R, Chakravarthy S. 2011. Culture and the role of choice in agency. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol.
101(1):46–61
Milojev P, Greaves L, Osborne D, Sibley CG. 2015. Stability and change in political conservatism following
the global financial crisis. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 41(1):127–39
Monga AB, John DR. 2010. What makes brands elastic? The influence of brand concept and styles of thinking
on brand extension evaluation. J. Mark. 74(3):80–92
Mynhardt JC. 2013. Intergroup attitude change in South Africa: a thirty-seven year longitudinal study.
J. Psychol. Afr. 23(4):549–60
Ng AH, Hynie M. 2014. Cultural differences in indecisiveness: the role of na¨ıve dialecticism. Personal. Individ.
Differ. 70:45–50
Ng AH, Hynie M, MacDonald TK. 2012. Culture moderates the pliability of ambivalent attitudes. J. Cross-
Cult. Psychol. 43(8):1313–24
Ng T, Feldman D. 2010. The relationships of age with job attitudes: a meta-analysis. Pers. Psychol. 63(3):677–
718
324 Albarracin ·Shavitt
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Nisbett RE, Peng K, Choi I, Norenzayan A. 2001. Culture and systems of thought: holistic versus analytic
cognition. Psychol. Rev. 108(2):291–310
Notthoff N, Carstensen LL. 2014. Positive messaging promotes walking in older adults. Psychol. Aging
29(2):329–41
Nteta TM, Greenlee JS. 2013. A change is gonna come: generational membership and White racial attitudes
in the 21st century. Polit. Psychol. 34(6):877–97
Orth U, Robins RW, Widaman KF. 2012. Life-span development of self-esteem and its effects on important
life outcomes. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 102(6):1271–88
Orth U, Trzesniewski KH, Robins RW. 2010. Self-esteem development from young adulthood to old age: a
cohort-sequential longitudinal study. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 98(4):645–58
Oswald FL, Mitchell G, Blanton H, Jaccard J, Tetlock PE. 2015. Using the IAT to predict ethnic and racial
discrimination: small effect sizes of unknown societal significance. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 108(4):562–71
Oyamot CM, Fisher EL, Deason G, Borgida E. 2012. Attitudes toward immigrants: the interactive role of the
authoritarian predisposition, social norms, and humanitarian values. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 48(1):97–105
Park LE, Young AF, Troisi JD, Pinkus RT. 2011. Effects of everyday romantic goal pursuit on women’s
attitudes toward math and science. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 37(9):1259–73
Pierro A, Mannetti L, Kruglanski AW, Klein K, Orehek E. 2012. Persistence of attitude change and attitude-
behavior correspondence based on extensive processing of source information. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol.
42(1):103–11
Pietri ES, Fazio RH, Shook NJ. 2013. Weighting positive versus negative: the fundamental nature of valence
asymmetry. J. Personal. 81(2):196–208
Pillaud V, Cavazza N, Butera F. 2013. The social value of being ambivalent: self-presentational concerns in
the expression of attitudinal ambivalence. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 39(9):1139–51
Ranney MA, Clark D. 2016. Climate change conceptual change: Scientific information can transform attitudes.
Top. Cogn. Sci. 8(1):49–75
Reed AE, Chan L, Mikels JA. 2014. Meta-analysis of the age-related positivity effect: age differences in
preferences for positive over negative information. Psychol. Aging 29(1):1–15
Rentfrow PJ, Goldberg LR, Levitin DJ. 2011. The structure of musical preferences: a five-factor model.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 100(6):1139–57
Riemer H, Shavitt S, Koo M, Markus HR. 2014. Preferences don’t have to be personal: expanding attitude
theorizing with a cross-cultural perspective. Psychol. Rev. 121(4):619–48
Rocklage MD, Fazio RH. 2014. Individual differences in valence weighting: when, how, and why they matter.
J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 50(1):144–57
Roos LE, Lebrecht S, Tanaka JW, Tarr MJ. 2013. Can singular examples change implicit attitudes in the
real-world? Front. Psychol. 4(Sept.):1–14
Rudman LA, McLean MC, Bunzl M. 2013. When truth is personally inconvenient, attitudes change: the
impact of extreme weather on implicit support for Green politicians and explicit climate-change beliefs.
Psychol. Sci. 24(11):2290–96
Savani K, Morris MW, Naidu NVR. 2012. Deference in Indians’ decision making: introjected goals or in-
junctive norms? J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 102(4):685–99
Schuldt JP, Konrath SH, Schwarz N. 2011. “Global warming” or “climate change”? Public Opin. Q. 75(1):115–
24
Schwartz SH, Cieciuch J, Vecchione M, Davidov E, Fischer R, et al. 2012. Refining the theory of basic
individual values. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 103(4):663–88
Shavitt S, Cho H. 2016. Culture and consumer behavior: the role of horizontal and vertical cultural factors.
Curr. Opin. Psychol. 8:149–54
Shavitt S, Cho H, Barnes A. 2017. Culture and Consumer Behavior. In Handbook of Cultural Psychology, ed. S
Kitayama, D Cohen. New York: Guilford Press. 2nd ed. In press
Shavitt S, Johnson TP, Zhang J. 2011. Horizontal and vertical cultural differences in the content of advertising
appeals. J. Int. Consum. Mark. 23:297–310
Sheets P, Domke DS, Greenwald AG. 2011. God and country: the partisan psychology of the presidency,
religion, and nation. Polit. Psychol. 32(3):459–84
www.annualreviews.org • Attitudes and Attitude Change 325
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Simmons JP, Nelson LD, Simonsohn U. 2011. False-positive psychology: Undisclosed flexibility in data
collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. Psychol. Sci. 22(11):1359–66
Spencer-Rodgers J, Williams MJ, Peng K. 2010. Cultural differences in expectations of change and tolerance
for contradiction: a decade of empirical research. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 14(3):296–312
Stanley DA, Sokol-Hessner P, Banaji MR, Phelps EA. 2011. Implicit race attitudes predict trustworthiness
judgments and economic trust decisions. PNAS 108(19):7710–15
Steinmetz H, Knappstein M, Ajzen I, Schmidt P, Kabst R. 2016. How effective are behavior change interven-
tions based on the theory of planned behavior? A three-level meta-analysis. Z. Psychol. 224(3):216–233
Stout JG, Dasgupta N, Hunsinger M, McManus MA. 2011. STEMing the tide: using ingroup experts to in-
oculate women’s self-concept in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). J. Personal.
Soc. Psychol. 100(2):255–70
Struthers A, Wang M. 2016. Buzz agents in a teen-driven social marketing campaign: Positive campaign
attitude leads to positive changes in health outcomes. Soc. Mark. Q. 22(3):218–35
Tannenbaum MB, Hepler J, Zimmerman RS, Saul L, Jacobs S, et al. 2015. Appealing to fear: a meta-analysis
of fear appeal effectiveness and theories. Psychiatr. Bull. 141(6):1178–204
Thibodeau PH, Crow L, Flusberg SJ. 2017. The metaphor police: a case study of the role of metaphor in
explanation. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 24(5):1375–86
Thomas WI, Znaniecki F. 1918–1920. The Polish Peasant in Europe and America. Boston: Gorham Press
Torelli CJ, ¨Ozsomer A, Carvalho SW, Keh HT, Maehle N. 2012. Brand concepts as representations of human
values: Do cultural congruity and compatibility between values matter? J. Mark. 76( July):92–108
Torelli CJ, Shavitt S. 2010. Culture and concepts of power. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 99(4):703–23
Torelli CJ, Shavitt S, Cho YI, Holbrook AL, Johnson TP, Weiner S. 2015. Justice or compassion? Cultural
differences in power norms affect consumer satisfaction with power-holders. Int. Mark. Rev. 324(3):279–
306
Triandis HC, Gelfand MJ. 1998. Converging measurement of horizontal and vertical individualism and col-
lectivism. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 74(1):118–28
Trzesniewski KH, Donnellan MB. 2010. Rethinking “Generation Me”: a study of cohort effects from 1976–
2006. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 5(1):58–75
Twenge JM. 2014. Generation Me—Revised and Updated: Why Today’s Young Americans Are More Confident,
Assertive, Entitled—and More Miserable than Ever Before. New York: Atria Books
Twenge JM, Honeycutt N, Prislin R, Sherman RA. 2016a. More polarized but more Independent: politi-
cal party identification and ideological self-categorization among US adults, college students, and late
adolescents, 1970–2015. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 42(10):1364–83
Twenge JM, Kasser T. 2013. Generational changes in materialism and work centrality, 1976–2007: associations
with temporal changes in societal insecurity and materialistic role modeling. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull.
39(7):883–97
Twenge JM, Sherman RA, Exline JJ, Grubbs JB. 2016b. Declines in American adults’ religious participation
and beliefs, 1972–2014. SAGE Open 6(1):2158244016638133
Tyson M, Covey J, Rosenthal HES. 2014. Theory of planned behavior interventions for reducing heterosexual
risk behaviors: a meta-analysis. Health Psychol. 33(12):1454–67
Valkenburg PM, Peter J, Walther JB. 2016. Media effects: theory and research. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 67(1):315–38
van Bavel JJ, Xiao YJ, Cunningham WA. 2012. Evaluation is a dynamic process: moving beyond dual system
models. Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass. 6:438–54
von Salisch M, Vogelgesang J, Kristen A, Oppl C. 2011. Preference for violent electronic games and aggressive
behavior among children: the beginning of the downward spiral? Media Psychol. 14(3):233–58
Wakslak C, Liberman N, Trope Y. 2007. Construal levels and psychological distance: effects on representation,
prediction, evaluation, and behavior. J. Consum. Psychol. 17(2):83–95
Wang Q. 2013. Chinese socialization and emotion talk between mothers and children in native and immigrant
Chinese families. Asian Am. J. Psychol. 4(3):185–92
Weaver JR, Bosson JK. 2011. I feel like I know you: sharing negative attitudes of others promotes feelings of
familiarity. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 37(4):481–91
326 Albarracin ·Shavitt
Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org. Guest (guest) IP: 199.83.221.44 On: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 13:58:39Wegener DT, Petty RE, Blankenship KL, Detweiler-Bedell B. 2010. Elaboration and numerical anchoring:
implications of attitude theories for consumer judgment and decision making. J. Consum. Psychol. 20(1):5–
16
Welch S, Sigelman L. 2011. The “Obama Effect” and White racial attitudes. Ann. Am. Acad. Polit. Soc. Sci.
634(Feb.):207–20
Wolsko C, Ariceaga H, Seiden J. 2016. Red, white, and blue enough to be green: effects of moral framing on
climate change attitudes and conservation behaviors. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 65:7–19
Yang H, Stamatogiannakis A, Chattopadhyay A. 2015. Pursuing attainment versus maintenance goals: the
interplay of self-construal and goal type on consumer motivation. J. Consum. Res. 42(1):93–108
Yang Y, Land KC. 2013. Age-Period-Cohort Analysis: New Models, Methods, and Empirical Applications. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press
Zabel KL, Biermeier-Hanson BBJ, Baltes BB, Early BJ, Shepard A. 2016. Generational differences in work
ethic: fact or fiction? J. Bus. Psychol. 32(3):301–15
Zell E, Su R, Li H, Ho M-HR, Hong S, et al. 2012a. Cultural differences in attitudes toward action and
inaction: the role of dialecticism. Soc. Psychol. Personal. Sci. 4(5):521–28
Zell E, Warriner AB, Albarrac´ın D. 2012b. Splitting of the mind: when the you I talk to is me and needs
commands. Soc. Psychol. Personal. Sci. 3(5):549–55
RELATED RESOURCES
Banaji MR, Greenwald AG. 2016. Blindspot: Hidden Biases of Good People. New York: Bantam
Brock TC, Green MC. 2005. Persuasion: Psychological Insights and Perspectives. Newcastle upon
Tyne, UK: Sage. 2nd ed.
Mercier H, Sperber D. 2017. The Enigma of Reason. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press
Sloman S, Fernbach P. 2017. The Knowledge Illusion: Why We Never Think Alone. New York:
Riverhead Books
www.annualreviews.org • Attitudes and Attitude Change 327